HOW TO
GET
RICH
FELIX
DENNISOther titles by Felix Dennis:
Muhammad Ali: the Glory Years (co-authored with Don Atyeo)
A Glass Half Full
Lone Wolf
First published in Great Britain 2006
7 9 10 86
Text (c) Felix Dennis 2006
Felix Dennis has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this workunder the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo-
copying, recording
or otherwise without the prior permission of the copyright owners.
Ebury Press, an imprint of Ebury Publishing.
Random House, 20 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SW1V 2SA
Random House Australia (Pty) Limited
20 Alfred Sircet, Milsons Point, Sydney, New South Wales 2061, Australia
Random House New Zealand Limited
I8 Poland Road, Glenfield, Auckland 10, New Zealand
Random House (Pty) Limited
Isle of Houghton, Corner of Boundary Road and Carse O'Gowrie, Houghton  
2198, South Africa
Random House Publishers India Private Limited
301 World Trade Tower, Hotel International Grand Complex, Barakhamba 
Lane, New Delhi 110 001, India
The Random House Group Limited Reg. No. 954009
www.random house.co.uk
A CIP catalogue record for this book is availible from the British Library.
Cover design by Andrew- Brown/2 Associates
Interior by seagulls.net
ISBN 9780091912659 [after Jan 2007)
ISBN 0091912652
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Clays of St Ives Ple
Every effort has been made to contact and clear permissions with relevant
copyright holders. Please contact the publisher with any queries.
H L Mencken quotes in Preface and Chapter 10 used by permissions of the  
Knoch Pratt Free library in
accordance with the terms of  the bequest of H L Mecken; Samuel Beckett  
quote in Chapter 4 used by permissionof Fiber & Faber; Bertrand Russell quote in Chapter 13 used by permission of  
The Bertrand Russell Peace
Foundation Ltd; A E Housman quote in Chapter 15 by permission of The  
Society of Authors as the literary
Representative of the Estate of A E Housman; Mary Quant quote in Chapter 
16 used try permission of Mary Quant;
G K Chesterton quote in Chapter 20 used by permission of AP Watt Ltd on  
behalf of The Royal Literary Fund.
Chapter 17, 'Stones In My Passway' by Ruben Johnson: Copyright (c)  
(1978), 1990, 1991 Lehsem II,
LLC and Claud L. Johnson; Administered by Music & Media International,  
Inc.
Internationial Copyright Secured All Rights Reserved.
For PETER GODFREY and ROBERT G. BARTNER
who walked with me, shoulder to shoulder, for thirty yearsCONTENTS
Preface - Can This Book Really Make Me Rich? xiii
Introduction - How Rich?   1
PART ONE - REASONS NOT TO GET RICH
1 Pole Positions   11
2 A Million to One 20
PART TWO - GETTING STARTED
3 Harnessing the Fear of Failure  29
4 The Search  39
5 The Fallacy of the Great Idea 55
6 Obtaining Capital  66
7 Never Give In   76
8 The Five Most Common Start-up Errors  83
PART THREE - GETTING RICH
9 Cardinal Virtues 105
10 A Few Words About Luck  127
11 The Art of Negotiating  140
12 Ownership! Ownership! Ownership!   158
13 The Joys of Delegation   175
14 A Piece of the Pie  185
15 The Power of Focus 203
PART FOUR - TROUBLESHOOTING & ENDGAME
16 Whoops! 223
17A Recap for Idlers  238
18How to Stay Rich 260
19 The Eight Secrets to Getting Rich   272
20 Remember to Duck!   274
Acknowledgements  276Thus spoke al-Kutba, god of the Nabataeans:
'The children of thy children shall
forget Me - and my
Name
it shall vanish from the mouths of men into the dust of the world.
And yet, thy children's children's children shall worship me
unknowing, while thy rich seek after what they need not,
while thy poorest curse at what the rich store up,
and while the cries and lamentations of
Men reach up to the heavens.All shall be as it was,
from now until
the end of
days.'How to Get Rich
Good fortune? The fact is
The more that you practise,
The harder you sweat,
The luckier you get.
Ideas? We've had'em
Since Eve deceived Adam,
But take it from me
Execution's the key.
The money? Just pester
A likely Investor.
To get what you need
You toady to greed.
The talent? Go sign it.
But first, wine and dine it.
It's tedious work
With a talented jerk.
Good timing? To win it
You gotta be in it.
Just never be late
To quit or cut bait.Expansion? It's vanity!
Profit is sanity.
Overhead begs
To walk on two legs.
The first step? Just do it
And bluff your way through it.
Remember to duck!
God speed ...
and Good Luck!PREFACE
CAN THIS BOOK REALLY
MAKE ME RICH?
There are few ways that a man can be more
innocently employed than in getting money.
SAMUEL JOHNSON (Boswell's LIFE OF JOHNSON)
WHY WOULD A RICH PERSON WASTE TIME WRITING
A BOOK TO HELP OTHER PEOPLE GET RICH?
Two reasons. Because I enjoy writing about something I feel I know about.
And because I believe that almost anyone of reasonable intelligence can
become rich, given sufficient motivation and application.
It also helps that I am writing while sipping a very fine wine indeed (a
Chateau d'Yquem 1986 if you really want to know), nibbling on fresh
smoked conch tidbits, ensconced by a window with one of the most  
beauti ful
views on earth. Across the valley, far, far below me, palm trees fringe the
fishing boats and yachts nodding in the harbour. Beyond the bay to the west,
a turquoise sea ripples out to a purple and pink horizon, heralding another
glorious sunset.
In the words of a Victorian English poet:
How pleasant it is to have money, heigh-ho!
How pleasant it is to have money.I am in Mustique, a tiny island in the Windward Islands of the Caribbean.
More specifically in my 'writer's cottage', a new study-cum-library some
distance from the main house, built solely for one purpose - to permit me to
write whatever I damn please in peace and quiet. Which is usually poetry, by
the way.
And all of this, as if you needed me to remind you, costs money. It's what
you get, if you want, when you're rich.
SO YOU AREN'T DOING THIS FOR THE MONEY?
Money is always welcome. But no. Very, very few authors become rich.
The odds against it are too steep. Merchandising and 'brand extensions',
like movies, games and toys based on fictional books, occasionally do the
trick. But nobody is going to buy a toy called 'How to Get Rich' now, are
they? (Then again, there's always the board game and the reality TV show
... just joking!)
IS THIS SOME KIND OF CON-JOB?
ARE YOU USING A GHOSTWRITER?
Nope and nope. How to Get Rich is not a con-job. And it is not being ghost
written. I am going to write every word myself in this book, Lord help me.
It will contain no jargon or mumbo-jumbo and it is certainly not one of
those messianic 'self-improvement' manuals seeking to spawn a cottage
industry of audio-visual tapes, DVDs and dubious hour-long commercials on
late-night television. Nor will you have to chant incantations or tie healing
crystals round your neck - let's leave that malarkey to footballers' and 
politicians' wives, shall we?
How to Get Rich sets out to tell you how I did it, how I got rich without
the benefit of a college education or a penny of capital. It will expose the
many errors I made along the way - which will contribute greatly to the
length! Finally, it will suggest ways in which you can avoid such errors and
start on getting rich.CAN THIS BOOK REALLY MAKE ME RICH? YOU'LL BE
SUGGESTING THAT IT WILL IMPROVE MY SEX LIFE NEXT
Possibly, to the first. It depends on your degree of motivation. In the event
of that possibility materialising, the answer to your second comment is: 'Yes,
it most certainly will!'
I cannot make you happy. I cannot make you healthy. But I'm pretty
certain I can improve your chances of becoming rich. Which, in turn, will
improve your sex life. People who grow rich almost always improve their sex
life. More people want to have sex with them. That's just the way human
beings work.
Money is power. Power is an aphrodisiac. It even says so in the Bible:
'Wine maketh merry: but money answereth all things' (Ec. 9:10). Money did
not make me happy. But it quite definitely improved my sex life.
JUST HOW QUICKLY CAN I BECOME RICH?
Quicker than you probably deserve, but slower than you would like - there
are too many variables for a definitive answer.
I have known it done inside five years, but there are very few 'short cuts',
either in life or in this book. As the American critic H. L. Mencken once
wrote: 'The inferior man's reasons for hating knowledge are not hard to
discern. He hates it because it is complex - because it puts an unbearable
burden on his meagre capacity for taking in ideas. Thus his search is always
for short cuts. All superstitions are such short cuts. Their aim is to make the
unintelligibie simple, and even obvious.'
Mencken was right. That's why I'm determined to cut any pseudo-scientific
drivel and jargon out of this book. It makes for good copy and adds a
spurious touch of authority to any debate. But it also leads inevitably to
error, being comprised of error itself: the delusion that incomprehensible
waffle impresses its audience.
Knowledge learned the hard way combined with the avoidance of error,
whenever and wherever possible, is the soundest basis for success in any
endeavourWHAT WILL I NEED TO DO.
APART FROM READING THE BOOK?
All the usual stuff. Just as the brilliant reggae old-timer, Jimmy Cliff, used to
sing in his most famous song: 'You can get it if you really want ...' He
succeeded, and so can you. But only if you really do want. And only if 'you
try ... try and try ... and try again ...' But we'll get to that later.
The bottom line is that if I did it, you can do it. I went from being a
pauper - a hippy dropout on the dole, living in a crummy room without the
proverbial pot to piss in, without even the money to pay the rent, without a
clue as to what to do next - to being rich. And I am certainly no business
genius, as my rivals will happily and swiftly confirm.
Yet the odd thing is, I've ended up far richer than most of my rivals,
HOW DID YOU DO IT?
Read the book and find out!
DO I HAVE TO READ YOUR BOOK
FROM BEGINNING TO END?
No. Dip in and out as you like. Make notes. Jot down points you think apply,
particularly to your situation and your personality. Or make no notes at all -
just highlight sentences or examples that catch your fancy.
A book like this is a tool, not an artifact. And you do not have to
agree with every point I make - one size does not suit all in the quest for
filthy lucre.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HOW TO
GET RICH AND ALL THE OTHER BOOKS ABOUT
BECOMING INCREDIBLY SUCCESSFUL?
Simple. I am not a charlatan and do not profess to be a miracle worker. How
to Get Rich is being written for amusement, not just effect or to earn a
fortune in the so-called 'self-improvement' industry. And, because I have
little left to prove in the field of generating wealth, my book is as truthful
and as complete as I can make it.
Lastly, I don't want to sell you anything else — like volume II and then
volume III or a set of patronising video tapes or DVDs. All you see is all you
get with How to Get Rich.I did not become rich by writing manuals telling other people how to get
rich. I do not have pearly-white teeth and I do not stride onto TV studio
podiums in 'casual' suits costing $10,000 spouting mantras with a cover
version of 'Simply the Best' belting out from the loudspeakers in front of a
staged audience of adoring 'fans'.
I got rich my way. You might even say the old-fashioned way. By making
errors, lots of errors, and learning from them.
Much of what I intend to share with you concerns those errors, rather
than my successes. In a nutshell, I'm not a mountebank. I'm just a guy that
got rich in the real world, not on the 'self-improvement' happy-clappy merry-
go-round, where the only real winner is the weasel with the blow-dried hair.
HOW RICH ARE YOU, ANYWAY?
I don't know. Neither does any rich person know. I haven't cashed in all my
assets yet and I'm not certain what they will fetch. Let's say between $400
million (US dollars) and $900 million of net worth before tax. I honestly
cannot fix a number any closer than that.
Five homes. Three estates. Fancy cars. Private jets. (The jets are always
rented. If it flies, floats or fornicates, always rent it - it's cheaper in the long
run.) Thousands of acres of land. Art on the walls and libraries stuffed with
first editions. Bronze statues littering up the garden. Chauffeurs, house-
keepers, financial advisors and other personal staff coming out of my rear
end.
Oh, and thousands of bottles of fine wine in the cellars. Never forget
the wine.
Less the debt, of course. Around $30 million of debt. Rich people always
have a certain degree of debt. Apparently it helps to reduce taxes - but I'm
not so hot on the bean-counting side. In fact, I still haven't quite got the
hang of a balance sheet. Amortisation always floors me
But then, I can't fly the jets or drive the Rolls-Royces or Bentleys either.
I never had the time or the inclination to learn. My constant refrain when I
was bumming rides from friends as a teenager was: 'You don't understand. I
was born to be driven.' Both my friends and myself thought that was just a
smart-aleck remark back then. Now, I kind of wonder if I already knew, or
at least suspected.
One or two more questions - then let's move on.HONESTLY SPEAKING, WHAT KIND OF PEOPLE
GET TO BECOME RICH?
An interesting topic. The writer, F. Scott Fitzgerald, once said: 'Let me tell
you about the very rich. They are different from you and me.' By which, I
suppose, he meant that they appear to have acquired characteristics that set
them apart from 'lesser' mortals. Ernest Hemingway's response was: 'Yes,
they're different, they have more money.' Typical Hemingway. But his
riposte isn't entirely satisfactory.
There is a confidence that radiates from first-born sons and daughters.
Not in all the cases I've observed, but in too many for it to be a coincidence.
A similar confidence is to be observed, more often than not, in people who
are rich, no matter whether they were born with it, inherited it or acquired
it through their own efforts.
You can see it in the way they walk into a hotel or restaurant they have
never visited before. In the irritating disposition of rich women to haggle in
an Oxfam shop over a designer dress - unlike any working-class woman, who
would be horrified at the thought of doing any such thing, even though she
perhaps needs the discount while the rich woman does not.
You can see it, too, in the way the children of the rich appear to assume
that the world was created entirely for their sole benefit. Money brings a  
kind
of insouciance with it. It is among wealth's least attractive characteristics.
Here is Richard Rumbold, an English republican 'conspirator', speaking
from the scaffold in 1685:
I never could believe that Providence had sent a few men into the world,
ready booted and spurred to ride, and millions ready saddled and
bridles to be ridden.
And neither, gentle reader, could I. I never could believe that.
Whatever qualities the rich may have, they can be acquired by anyone
with the tenacity to become rich. The key, I think, is confidence.
Confidence and an unshakeable belief it can be done and that you are the
one to do it.
Tunnel vision helps. Being a bit of a shit helps. A thick skin helps.
Stamina is crucial, as is a capacity to work so hard that your best friends  
mock
you, your lovers despair and the rest of your acquaintances watch furtively
from the sidelines, half in awe and half in contempt. Luck helps - but only ifyou don't seek it.
The answer to the question, then, is perhaps this: not those who want to
and not those who need to, but those who are utterly determined to - what-
ever the cost.
WHAT ARE THE BIGGEST MYTHS YOU KNOW
REGARDING GETTING RICH?
The first is the claim that people did not set out to get rich but became rich
by 'accident'. 'Oh, I only did what I love to do and woke up one day to find
myself wealthy.' That sort of thing. It may have happened. But very rarely in
my experience.
Some people are merely better at disguising desire, that's all. Others,
usually not those you would care to spend a vacation with, have a naked lust
for money stamped on their features, evident in even their most common-
place conversations. But a capacity for disguise and dissimulation doesn't
alter the fact that the vast majority of the self-made rich worked, secretly or
openly, like billy-o to acquire their wealth.
The second myth is that people got rich by having a 'great idea'. While
this is a more feasible hypothesis than having got rich by accident, it is a trap,
because it is a partial truth. All of us have had great ideas from time to rime.
I have had a great idea for a kind of Spiderman gun that would shoot out a
sticky web at a burglar in your house and disable them without harming
them. Will it get made? Probably not.
The follow-through, the execution, is a thousand times more important
than a 'great idea'. In fact, if the execution is perfect, it sometimes barely
matters what the idea is. If you want to get rich, don't sit around waiting for
inspiration to strike. Just get busy getting rich.
Thirdly, and lastly, I think that perhaps the most destructive myth about
becoming rich lies in remarks like: 'Well, it was OK for you starting out in
the late 1960s. But times have moved on. You couldn't do it that way today.'
Perhaps not, but you can certainly do it some way. Times change, but
human nature, the lure of wealth and the determination to acquire it remain
a shining constant in the world of ambitious men and women. The example
of others not even born in the 1960s is all around you. They prove such
thinking to be false.
If you think that it can't be done and dwell on that thought too long,
then you are likely to remain poor. It's as simple as that.WHY START A BOOK LIKE THIS WITH A POEM?
DID YOU WRITE IT?
Yes I wrote it - but that particular poem is more in the way of a nursery
rhyme. And I began this book with a poem to demonstrate that becoming
rich has given me the most precious thing in life.
And just what is the most precious thing in life that riches can supply?
Easy For me, it's Time.
Time. Time to read and write poetry if I want to. Or to write a book if it
takes my fancy. Time to travel on the slightest whim, to walk in the woods,  
to
think, to commission art, to read, to drink, to hang out with friends and loved
ones ...  to do just about anything really, as long as it does not involve day  
after
grinding day making money in an office or a factory for somebody else.
That's what money can do. That's why you picked this book up. To
make the money to do what the hell you want. Now I suggest you flip the
page and read the poem that follows - even if you do not normally read
poetry it's worth a couple of minutes of study. Its subject is the destructive
power of a certain type of envy.
Then skip to the Introduction, where we can discuss just how rich you
want to be.What's It Like Then, Being Rich?
What's it like then, being rich,
Knitting gold to warm an itch?
Very much like being poor;
Wealth is just a key, no more.
Why not share this magic key
To luxury - and start with me!
Surely better that you earn it;
Could I trust you to return it?
How does one become your ilk?
Is it bred in mothers' milk?
Many paths can lead to riches,
Few in sunlight, most in ditches.
Wherein lies the difference
From us - this odd ambivalence?
Envy, malice, obligations;
Toadying from poor relations.
Grown far richer than his neighbour,
Why would any rich man labour?
Wealth is salt in wine immersed.
Quaffing but excites the thirst.
Salt my arse! It's filthy greed -
How many homes does one man need?
For some the trick's in trading it;
For others, in parading it.
I've seen. But surely, comfort pales
Perched on padded Chippendales?
When affluence holds no surprise,Wonders come in others' eyes.
Aye, the eyes of tart and whore!
What might you miss, if you were poor?
Time, The luxury of choices.
First editions. Old Rolls-Royces,INTRODUCTION
HOW RICH?
What's a thousand dollars?
Mere chicken feed, A poultry matter.
GROUCHO MARX, THE COCONUTS
This is a thin(ish) book with a hefty(ish) price. But a price probably worth
paying for those who absolutely, positively - even desperately - wish to be 
rich.
Not super-rich, mind you. Not filthy, stinking rich. This book cannot
assist anyone who aspires to the Bill Gates or Duke of Westminster leagues.
No book can do that and that is not our concern here. Bill's vast fortune, I
would suggest, did not arise simply from the implementation of good ideas
or the fulfilment of any single vision. It derives from deep within Bill Gates
- and we'll come on to that later.
The duke, of course, inherited his massive fortune. Today, he is appar-
ently worth the best part of £5 billion. His job is to safeguard that fortune
for succeeding generations of dukes, especially from the predations of  
greedy
tax collectors and spendthrift governments. I do not envy him such a task. It
must be weary work, labouring for descendants he will never meet.
The duke, then, is massively asset rich and relatively cash poor. Relatively,
mind. (No pun intended.) We'll come on to that later in this chapter.
Relative wealth is a fascinating subject.
No, this book is about becoming one of the common or garden rich -
world-class footballer rich; or J. K. Rowling rich; or rich enough to stop
looking at the price of almost anything that takes your fancy. Rich enough to
retire, or to work eighteen hours a day, or drink yourself into oblivion every
night — if that's what you want.
Rich enough to smile sweetly or sneer at bank managers, depending on
what you had for breakfast that morning; to turn your relatives green with
poorly concealed jealousy while they creep around with their hands out; rich
enough to buy a massive yacht (I don't advise it, though) and sail away into
the sunset like the Owl and the Pussycat for years on end.Rich enough to live where you want, to go where you want, to do what
you want, to meet who you want. Rich enough to buy the only two things
apart from health and love worth fussing about in life. Time. And the option
of not having to be in any particular place on any particular day doing any
particular thing in order to pay the rent or the mortgage.
And rich enough to begin to worry about taxes. To begin the process of
employing that vast army of lawyers, accountants, advisors and estate plan-
ners who will descend upon you like uninvited vultures after a battle. A
group to whom, even though you pay them tens and tens of thousands of
pounds a year, you will be forever in thrall. (That large yacht and the sailing -
away plan is looking better by the minute, isn't it!)
Certainly rich enough for people to respect you - but in a peculiar way.
Not in the way we respect people who do really tough, worthwhile jobs -
those who nurse dying children or teach for a living. And certainly not the
respect earned by heroines and heroes like Marie Curie or Nelson Mandela.
Money in sufficient quantities garners a different kind of respect for its
owner, a difference rooted in the nature of envy. Few of us have the courage
to nurse dying children or to spend decades in prison fighting tyranny. And
we do not envy those who can do such things, even as we look up to them.
On the other hand, nearly all of us want money. We feel free to envy the
rich. And most of us believe, rightly or wrongly, that we would be pertectly
able to cope with the pressures associated with acquiring too much money.
The more thoughtful among us might conclude that we would be able do a
lot of good with it, as well as making ourselves and our families secure.
Ask yourself this : is there a single person of your acquaintance you could
be certain would refuse a bequest of £10 million? Personally, I cannot. And
I'm willing to bet you can't either.
So how rich is rich?
The value of money changes inexorably over time, even in decades and
centuries of low inflation. Economists and historians now have so many
methods of evaluating the comparative worth of money over long periods
that the exercise has become virtually meaningless to all but specialists.
Meaningless because of the changes in the quality and range of goods avail-
able, the earning power of immediate and foreign neighbours, the impor-
tance (or otherwise) of the preservation of ancestral assets like land and art,
and a host of other factors.
So let's ignore all that and plump for 'purchasing power' in the last quar-ter of a century as a rough-and-ready guide. Since 1980, the purchasing  
power
of $1 million in the US has decreased by more than half. In Britain, the
purchasing power of £1 million in 1980 has decreased by over 60 per cent.
To put it another way, £760,000 in hard cash back in 1980 would equate
to the spending power of £2 million today. While you might not have been
a millionaire technically back then, you would certainly have been the equiv-
alent of one by today's standards.
So how rich is rich in the first decade of the 21st century?
The following table is based on tax-paid cash-in-band or assets that can
be swiftly reduced to cash - publicly traded stocks and shares, bank drafts,
gold, etc. It takes no account of assets that take time to realise without incur-
ring loss in a "fire sale' - your home, property, land, shares held in private
companies, pension funds or fixed bonds. It also assumes you have low debt
and live in a Western democracy.
Table 1: Wealth Measured by Cash-in-hand or Quickly Realisable Assets
The comfortable poor
The comfortably off
The comfortably wealthy
The lesser rich
The comfortably rich
The rich
The seriously rich
The truly rich
The filthy rich and the super rich
Note to Table 1: There are few people in the world who could put their hands  
on £100 million in cash in a week or even a month, no matter what they are  
worth. Such people have too much respect for their fortunes to leave that kind  
of change floating around in quick-release assets or cash. In addition, the  
reduction of any asset to cash very often leads to the imposition of capital  
gains tax - the equivalent of the Black Death to the truly rich. If I had to find  
that kind of money, I would have to borrow it, and then sell assets to repay the  
debt.
£50,000—£200,000
£200,000—£500,000
£500,000—£1 million
£1 million—£5 million
£5 million—£15 million
£15million—£35  
million
£35 million—£50 mitfion
£50 million—£100 million
Over £100 millionAs far as the total asset value or true net worth of a person is concerned (as 
opposed to quickly realisable net worth), the numbers arc very different. And 
different for a variety of reasons. Pardy because of capital gains tax and other 
levies. Partly because death leads to death duties. Pardy because of planned 
inheritance schemes and donations to trusts and charities. And mostly, because 
few rich people can know their true net worth until all dicir major assets are 
sold off.
It sounds crazy, but the richer you are and the more financial advisors you 
employ, the less likelihood there is that you can ever discover what you are 
really worth. It's a nice problem to have, but it is still a problem.
This is why so many rich people distrust the 'rich lists' and league tables of 
wealth published every so often in newspapers and magazines. We know that 
if we cannot calculate our true net worth, and if our paid armies of 
accountants cannot agree upon a figure, then compilers of lists and financial 
journalists certainly cannot do so with any real accuracy. In the words of the 
art collector and oil billionaire John Paul Getty: 'If you can actually count your 
money, you are not really a rich man.'
A final caveat concerning the total asset value of rich individuals is almost as 
obvious. Above a certain limit, it doesn't really matter to them how rich they 
are - give or take the odd miser and the odd hundred million. That is, it ceases 
to matter unless you are one of the intended heirs. Then it matters. Boy, docs it 
matter!
You might be surprised at the number of wealthy individuals who die without 
proper tax-planning, or even intestate - a fancy way of saying that someone 
has died without a legally enforceable will in place. It is these 'intestate estates' 
that so please the Chancellor of the Exchequer and his minions. It you die 
without a legally enforceable will, chances are the taxman will gobble up a 
great deal of what you left behind.
This next table, then, shows my take on a person's total net worth, assuming 
you are not about to die, that you are prepared to take time to cash out such 
assets and, again, that you have low debt and live in a Western democracy.
Table 2: Wealth Measured by Total Assets (True Net Worth)
£1 milliore—£2 million                                The comfortable poor
£2 million—£5 million                                The comfortably off
£5 million—£15 million                              The comfortably wealthy
£15 million—£40 million                           The lesser rich
£40 million—£75 million                           The comfortably rich£75 million—£100 million                         The rich
£100 million—£200 million                       The seriously rich
£200 million-£400 million                       The truly rich
£400 million-£999 million                       The filthy rich
Over £999 million                                     The super rich
Note to Table 2: The importance of taxation upon assets in such a table  
cannot be underestimated. In certain circumstances the true net worth of an  
individual or family might be reduced by as much as half, if little or no tax-
planning has been undertaken.
So how rich do you want to be? The usual answer is 'rich enough to be happy'.
But riches do not confer happiness! I have lost count of the number of friends, 
lovers and acquaintances I have told tiiis to, especially when I first passed 
seven noughts of cash in hand. I don't bother any more. The incredulous look 
on their face is always the same. What they are really thinking is: 'Well, 
maybe you are not happy with all that dough, Felix. But I know that I would 
be. Just try me!'
Still, let me repeat it one more time. Becoming rich does not guarantee 
happiness. In fact, it is almost certain to impose the opposite condition - if not 
from the stresses and strains of protecting it, then from the guilt that inevitably 
accompanies its arrival.
Even leaving any moral dimension - heaven, camels and the eyes of needles - 
out of the equation, consider at least the wise sentiments of the author James 
Baldwin in his book Nobody Knows My Name, in which he concluded:
Money, it turned out, was exactly like sex. You thought of nothing else if
you didn't have it, and thought of other things if you did.
But let's face it, you didn't buy this book to be happy. You bought it in the
hope it would provide pointers to becoming rich. According to my tables of
wealth, 'rich' starts at a total asset value of £15-£40 million (also known as
'the lesser rich').
So that's where we're aiming. For starters, anyway.
At the top end of that range, you might (just might, mind!) creep into
the last few places on the Sunday Times Rich List, compiled annually by
Philip Beresiford and his team of researchers. The STRL is the gold  
standard
of league tables of the wealthy in Britain.Your rank then would be around '999 equal' of the top 1,000 richest
individuals and families in the UK. As far as the USA is concerned, your  
£40
million would place you nowhere on any major list. Except, perhaps, some-
what high in the kind of esteem I described earlier among family, friends,
partners, gold-diggers, stockbrokers, bankers and estate agents, Well, I did
say that £15-£40 million was only a start!
Of course, all measurements are arbitrary. They are just an attempt by
humans to make some kind of order out of a chaotic universe. In and of
themselves, they are meaningless.
Quite as valid a measurement of money as asset value or cash in the bank
might be 'Availability on Request' or 'Lifetime Spending Totals'. If you had
no money yourself, but a fairy godmother gave you exactly what you needed
whenever you requested it, you would never make the Sunday Times Rich
List, but you would be the richest person in the world, even if you gave
everything away each night.
And as for Lifetime Spending Totals (LSTs) as a measurement, I would
love to know how much various people have spent in the course of their life
- including me. Sadly, I know I am never going to be able to figure it out,
except for the certainty that I have spent hundreds of millions of dollars. My
LST will have been eye-watering,
I also know that because nearly all so-called 'old money' has to be
protected from any one generation's carelessness, their family wealth —  
espe-
cially property - is tied up in trust funds and entailments. In effect, many of
the children born into this 'old money' are as poor as church mice, simply
because they cannot get their hands on the loot. They would have surpris-
ingly low LSTs. Clean fingernails and good manners, certainly; but low life-
time spending totals.
Now, enough waffling about definitions. Let's get down to making some
dough.
Let's get rich!PART ONE
R E A S O N S
NOT TO
GET RICH1
POLE POSITIONS
No task is a long one but the task on which
one dare not start. It becomes a nightmare.
CHARLES BAUDELAIRE , My HEART LAID BARE
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, START YOUR ENGINES . . .
For a great many people, getting started on the road to wealth is the most
difficult part. Or so they believe. The nuances of each individual case need
not concern us, but the difficulties, as stated by virtually every wannabe I
ever listened to on the subject, usually fall into one of three broad categories
- often age related.
If young and relatively penniless, many will argue their lack of experi-
ence and capital (especially capital!) dooms them to decades of wage slavery.
If slightly better off and on the way up with a halfway decent job and
perhaps the probability of further advancement, the problem is often
considered to be the loss of what they have already achieved. Plus the
lack of capital.
By the time one is a senior manager or professional, probably with a
decent house, a mortgage and children, it is the risk to the security and
happiness of the latter (and maybe to a spouse), plus the usual lack of capi-
tal, which are most often cited as insuperable difficulties to taking the plunge.
All such objections to becoming rich are spurious, no matter how
sincerely held. But before dealing with each in turn, let me digress for a
moment regarding upbringing, race, colour, educational  
qualifications
and gender .
I am doing so here because I do not wish to waste anybody's time. We
will be touching on some of the circumstances described above shortly, but,
in a nutshell, my experience has been that money is colour-blind, race-blind,
sex-blind, degree-blind and couldn't care less who brought you up or in
what circumstances.
Money is one of the most neutral substances on earth. Others may
conspire against you obtaining it through bigotry or prejudice. But they can
only succeed if you permit them to.The object of your goal, in and of itself, is non-sentient. If you truly
believe that your race, sex or upbringing can keep you from becoming rich,
then you had best give up here. Either return this book to the shelf or, if you
have already bought it, return it to the bookstore for a refund or give it to a
friend. You may obtain the refund or please your friend.
But you will never get rich.
YOUNG, PENNILESS AND INEXPERIENCED?
It's the same the whole world over,
It's the poor wot gets the blame,
It's the rich wot gets the pleasure,
Ain't it all a bleeding shame?
VARIETY HALL SONG (c.1915)
Excellent. You stand by far the best chance of becoming as rich as you please.
You have an advantage that neither education nor upbringing, nor even
money, can buy. You have almost nothing. And therefore you have almost
nothing to lose.
Yes, yes, I know you've heard all that before. But consider for a moment.
Nearly all the great fortunes acquired by entrepreneurs arose because they
had nothing to lose. Nobody had bothered to tell them that such and such
a thing could not be done or would be likely to fail. Or if they had been told,
then they weren't listening. They were too busy proving those around them
wrong - without even meaning to.
Not knowing that something cannot be done, you are likely to waltz into
uncharted minefields where angels before you have feared to dance.
Astonishingly, you may be fortunate enough to succeed, to some degree or
another. Conventional wisdom will then be revised by those around you and
the next generation will be taught that what you did can always or often be
done - only to discover, when they attempt it themselves, that in reality you
missed every landmine by pure, dumb luck.
Never trust the vast mountain of conventional wisdom. It contains great
nuggets of wisdom, it is true. But they lie alongside rivers of fool's gold.
Conventional wisdom daunts initiative and offers far too many convenient
reasons for inaction, especially for those with a great deal to lose.  
Fortunatelyfor you, you do not have anything to lose and can afford to ignore the
"jobsworths' and Jeremiahs who have lived upon the mountain for so long
that they have come to worship it.
Nor is a propensity for risk-taking your only advantage. You have stam-
ina far, far beyond those who are twenty or thirty years older. The stamina
necessary for long, grinding hours of labour in the cause of getting rich.
Stamina enough to party all night and go straight back to work for a twelve-
or sixteen-hour day. I remember such stamina fondly.
You have no idea how much the stamina of the young is envied by the
rest of us. Along with a degree of callousness and enviable powers of speedy
recuperation from reverses, stamina is your secret weapon. Its attributes will
see you through a raft of catastrophes that would virtually annihilate older
men and women.
In addition, your instinctive knowledge of modern technology gives you
another edge. (All those hours spent playing computer or video games might
not have been such a waste after all.) At least you know the difference
between an iPod and a JPEG. And knowledge is power, at whatever age,
whether earned by blood and tears or imbibed at a mother's breast.
Treasure that instinctive knowledge. I still own half of the personal
computing magazines in Britain - PC Pro, Computer Shopper, Computer
Buyer, MacUser, Custom PC - in part because of an early addiction to pinball
and electronic arcade games. While I knew nothing of computing (and still
do not), the instincts honed by countless hours of shoving money into slots
forewarned me of their potential. The first few million pounds I ever
trousered  were a direct result of trusting instincts entirely at odds with
conventional wisdom of any sort.
Two immediate examples leap to mind. As we will see in more detail
later, I published a series of eight-page full-colour, folded posters (with head-
lines and articles printed on the back) and charged the same cover price as
magazines with ten times that number of pages. The result was dubbed a
'poster-magazine' and sold millions of copies around the world. Nobody had
told me it couldn't be done because nobody had done it before.
Similarly, as previously noted, I launched half a dozen magazines about
a new fad called 'personal computing' back in the 1980s, even though British
magazine retailers and wholesalers at the time were unanimous in their belief
that 'nobody will ever buy them'. Those magazines have earned me tens of
millions of pounds in the last twenty-five years and are still earning me
money today. Conventional wisdom is usually right. But when it is wrong, itcan offer quite extraordinary opportunities for those too stubborn or inex-
perienced to pay attention to well-meaning naysayers.
Perhaps most importantly of all, as a young and penniless and inexperi-
enced person, you are not an 'expert'. Thus you are more willing to learn
than those in their thirties, forties or fifties. You are not afraid of making
mistakes, admitting them when you do and getting right back on track.
(Speaking of tracks, you have no track record to defend, either.)
Here is a pearl beyond price and - Glory Hallelujah! - it cost you noth-
ing to obtain. Anyone not busy learning is busy dying. For as long as you
foster a willingness to learn, you will ward off sclerosis of the brain and hard-
ening of the mental arteries. Curiosity has led many a man and women into
the valley of serious wealth.
Ambition, fearlessness, self-belief, stamina, a degree of callousness, a will-
ingness to learn. These are your advantages over the middle-aged and the
old. 'Gather ye rosebuds while ye may!' Could you turn the clock back for
me by forty years, I would willingly swap you every penny and every posses-
sion I own in return. And I would have the better of the bargain, too!
So what does the future hold for a young man or woman determined to
become far wealthier than their parents? Here is how I see it:
The way will most likely be hard, your failures many. It will be fun and it
will get a little hairy, even scary, at times. But the earlier you start and the
more risks you are prepared to run, tempered by listening hard and choos-
ing the right mountain (we'll come to that later), the more certain it is that,
sooner or later, you will find yourself with a small success on your hands.
And one success, with luck, will lead to another.
If there is a single category of person for whom this book should prove
the most useful, it is you: the young, penniless and inexperienced. I know.
I've been there.
And if I was lucky enough to find a way through, then so can you.
Stick with me, young brother or sister. You are suffering from nothing
more than excusable confusion and a lack of experience, conditions that will
pass with time, and whose passing can be expedited by fierce determination
and application.
Believe it or not, I envy each and every one of you.
SLIGHTLY BETTER OFF AND ON THE WAY UP?I have a bone to pick with Fate.
Come here and tell me, girlie,
Do you think my mind is maturing late,
Or simply rotted early?
OGDEN  NASH, 'Lines ON FACING  FORTY '
This is the point at which many people vaguely wonder about starting their
own business, either on their own or with a partner or two. They have
enough experience to know how the companies they work for function.
Perhaps even how their industry functions. And they see a niche - as yet
imperfectly filled. They have 'an idea'. (See Chapter 5: The Fallacy of the
Great Idea.)
Yet they hesitate. They fear losing what they have already achieved more
than they desire to enrich themselves. Personally, I am on more than famil-
iar terms with this syndrome. I meet it every day, because it affects (or
afflicts) a great many of the fine men and women who run my own compa-
nies. Perhaps even a majority of them.
I employ a great many people smarter than I am. That's not false
modesty. That's a stone-cold fact. The only two reasons they continue to
work for me and put money into my pocket are that, on the positive side,
they enjoy their work, and on the negative side, they fear losing what they
have already gained - challenging work, congenial colleagues, a certain status
and the promise of promotion and pay rises.
They know this as well as I do. (They are far from fools, otherwise I
would hardly employ them.) But fear holds them back, with the exception
of those rare individuals who are content with their lot.
And what is fear? 'Fear is the little death, death by a thousand cuts,' goes
the ancient Japanese saying. Nifty, but ultimately unhelpful. Similar to
Shakespeare's 'Cowards die many time before their deaths: / The valiant
never taste of death but once.'
But is fear really the father of cowardice? Let's leave that to the philoso-
phers. In business, in the accumulation of wealth, it is an impediment, for
sure. But then, so is recklessness. No, I believe that it is the fear of failure
which looms largest here. And fear of failure is definitely something that can
be dealt with, and will be dealt with at length in this book. (See Chapter 3:
Harnessing the Fear of Failure.)Outsiders are sometimes surprised at my reaction when people in this cate-
gory, the Slightly Better Off and On The Way Up, decide to leave one of my
own companies and set up on their own. I always wish them well. Not only
outwardly, but in my heart, too. Often I throw a party for them. Or write
glowing testimonials. Once or twice I have even underwritten their office  
lease
or introduced them to a banker or a lawyer I trust. Why do I react that way?
Three reasons. Firstly, I'm proud of them. Proud that those who work
for me are brave enough, motivated enough and trained sufficiently well to
go for it on their own. Boldness attracts applause, as the writer and philos-
opher Goethe once remarked in doggerel:
Whatever you can do, or dream you can, begin it!
Boldness has genius, power and magic in it.
Secondly, it's win-win. If they fail, they may well return to our company,
especially if they remember that my senior colleagues and I sincerely wished
them success in their new venture. Thus, if they fail, the company will be
enhanced by their return. While if they should succeed - then we will be all
richer for having an old alumnus as a friendly rival in the industry, rather  
than
having created a enemy who wishes us anything but well.
Lastly, it's because I fear them. I fear they may have spotted something we
have missed, some gap in the market. I fear we may have failed to listen to
them. I fear that their new venture will grow at our expense while it poaches
our personnel and our market share. And the only way to deal with fear is to
cosy up to it. To took it in the eye and pump its hand. To translate its nega-
tive energy into adrenaline. To harness it. To laugh with it, rather than at it.
Perhaps this could be you giving your current boss the scare of his or her
life? At the very least, providing your idea or venture has serious merit, any
sensible company would attempt to buy you off. If they do not, then perhaps
they are not a company that deserves to benefit from your talents? It's a
thought, isn't it?
As one who has been 'the boss' for longer than many of you have been
alive, I can assure you that you enjoy much greater leverage than you might
believe. But you will never find that out until you go for it.
For the Slightly Better Off and On The Way Up, now is the time to
consider whether or not you intend to continue making me (and people like
me) even richer, or whether you wish to become rich yourself. You have littletime left in which to make up your mind. Your youth and stamina is ebbing
away. You are getting too comfortable.
It is not a course lor everyone. But I think you can guess what my advice
to you would be.
What the hell. Go for it!
SENIOR MANAGER OR PROFESSIONAL?
Pushy young turks are impatient for news —
Young Cinderellas are singing the blues -
Wannabees, just like you used to be ... Choose!
Whose gonna fill this dead man's shoes?
'DEAD MAN'S SHOES'
Welcome! I'm surprised you could bring yourself to read such a book. It's a
good sign. It shows you're still curious. Still hungry. Not as hungry as the
penniless lad or lass at the beginning of this chapter, of course. But then
youth is wasted on the young - and they have so much learning to do, do
they not?
YOU, on the other hand, have learned much. There is little about your
company you do not understand. little, too, about your industry that has
escaped you. You have seen a great many fools take the plunge into freelance
work or set up in business on their own with such high hopes. And watched
nearly all of them come crashing down in flames or creep through the bank-
ruptcy courts hoping nobody would notice.
But I bet you noticed. I'd bet my bottom dollar that you noticed.
Still, there have been one or two who made it, haven't there? One who
even suggested you take the plunge with her and cake a piece of the action?  
Was
that the one you turned down? The woman who waves when she passes you
in her Mercedes-Benz SLR convertible on her way to a golf club you cannot
afford to join? From a house on the water with its own dock, apparently. The
one who is now far richer than she deserves to be? The one who got lucky?
Let's face it, you were, and are, smarter than she is. Or ever will be.
Annoying, isn't it?
But you don't have to give up hope. With luck you'll make the board infour or five years, if you haven't already. So much easier to strike out on your
own from such a position, rather than acting precipitately, non? The banks
will listen more closely to a board director, after all.
And it's true you have responsibilities. The mortgage has some years to
go, although the house increases in value every year. The kids aren't through
college yet, but they soon will be. It's just a question of waiting. Of recog-
nising 'the realities of the present tempered by the necessities of the past and
the possibilities of the future', as the author R. G. Collingwood put it. But
then, he was writing about history.
If you detect a trace of cynicism in the above description, then you arc
correct to do so. And for a simple reason. In nearly forty years of doing busi-
ness, I know of only six senior managers or professionals between forty and
fifty who struck out on their own. And two of those were lawyers.
One did very well indeed with his own law firm. Two of them did  fairly
well. One went belly up and never recovered financially. One threw in the
towel and owns a tiny bar on an island in Croatia. (I suspect he is the happiest
of the lot.) The remaining one shot himself when his venture collapsed.
None of them became really rich.
Yet you picked up this book. You're still curious. You're still hungry.
Read on, my learned friend. How to Get Rich may subvert you yet, though I
very much doubt it.
And you know what? The kids and the house and the mortgage and your
retired parents and the love of your life (whether a man or a woman) and all
your current responsibilities - they are not the real problem. They are either
inanimate, or they love you, or they don't love you. They will not love you
less (or more) if you decide to surprise everyone around you and seize the
time. As you could seize it, if you truly wished to. Then you'd show them,
Why not face the unpalatable truth? These are excuses. They are nothing
but a smokescreen. An alibi. Convenient camouflage to prevent you from
accepting that you will probably never be rich.
Soon, you must choose. Many people would say you have left it too late
to choose. But still, you picked up this book. You're still curious. You're still
hungry. And you know it can be done. Even better than the young and penni-
less and those on their way up, you know it can be done. Better still, you  
know
how it can be done. You have helped make it happen — for someone else.
The only question is: will you dare to try? If you will, then you are onein a million. Or two million or three. Your chances are slim, but they are not
impossible. My earnest advice is to get yourself a young and fearless partner
with tons of stamina.
Choose him or her with care. It's your best chance to get rich.2
A MILLION
TO ONE
There are three kinds of lies.
Lies, damn lies and statistics.
THOMAS CARLYLE, CHARTISM
'Dare not' is one thing. 'Cannot' is another. Not everyone can be rich. But
anyone can dare to. Somebody has to. Let's take a look at the arithmetic
relating to the odds.
By my earlier definition, only 0.000016 per cent of 60 million British
citizens are rich. That's less than 1 per cent of 1 per cent of 1 per cent of 1
per cent of 1 per cent of the total population. If your best friend inherited
one million pounds and gave you 0.000016 of their windfall, you would
receive a princely sixteen quid. 'Hey! Thanks a bunch, old chum.'
If wealth were decided by lottery, you would have sixteen chances in a
million of scraping into the top thousand richest people in the UK. To reach
the top fifty, you would have to do better. A lot better. Like one chance in a
million, allowing that a fair percentage of the places in those leagues are
taken by those who inherited their loot - or a good chunk of it, anyway.
These are not very enticing odds.
Fortunately, less and less wealth is decided by the lottery of inheritance.
Only a quarter of the entries now in the Sunday Times Rich List in Britain
find themselves there due solely to inherited wealth. If, indeed, it is that  
many.
Twenty-five years ago it was different story. Back then, nearly three-
quarters of the buggers were force-fed their wealth from golden spoons. (In
those days, though, there were only 200 entries on the list.) Low have the
mighty fallen! And they'll be falling further yet when another blasted nouveau
riche like you, dear reader, elbows his or her way into the golden horde.
If you can, that is. Because not all of us are cut out for it. Let us explore
factors likely to exclude an individual from becoming rich. This is where we
sort the wolves from the does, the prey from the predator and you from a
lifetime of wage slavery.There's health, for a start. People in poor health usually find it difficult,
no matter how clever they are, to muster the stamina that becoming rich
demands. In any case, when you are really poorly, the allure of wealth  
rapidly
recedes - except as far as first-class health care is concerned. (I can attest to
this from personal experience. Twice now I have survived life-threatening
illnesses. Making money was not big on my list of priorities at that time. In
fact, I was so far gone at one point, that I forgot to sue the bastards who
were responsible. Looking back, I must have been very ill indeed!)
As always, there are exceptions. The theoretical physicist, Stephen
Hawking, has been confined to a wheelchair for years with a rare and
appalling disease. Yet he made a bundle with a book that very few people
have ever read right through to the end. A book that has sold millions of
copies, A Short History of Time. (And did you know he featured in an edition
of The Simpsons?) My hat off to you, professor.
We must also factor in disadvantage and age. Not of colour, sex, race,
religion, upbringing or lack of education. None of those present insuperable
hurdles in a Western democracy. But mental handicap, growing senility and
the physical decline of old age - none of which need be life-threatening in
the short term - virtually rule out any serious accumulation of wealth, except
by inheritance or winning a lottery.
So that leaves the relatively fit and those not old enough to call them-
selves old. Close to 40 per cent of the population of the UK are either old
enough to have little hope of acquiring real wealth if they have not done so
already, or are too young to be able to acquire it in the short term, except
by inheritance. If you fall into neither of these groups, you now have only
35,999,000 people to beat.
That equates to twenty-five chances in a million of scraping into the top
thousand richest people in the country. Still daunting odds.
But, wait! There are huge chunks of the population around you who either
have no desire to be rich or have chosen professions that rule them out of the
race. I asked a researcher to estimate for me the total number of people  
work-
ing for the government in Britain. (If you can afford it, always get someone
else to do the grunt work. Sec Chapter 13: The Joys of Delegation.) While
it is theoretically possible for a civil servant to resign from their job and 
becomea multi-millionaire (especially, apparently, if they worked for the Ministry of
Defence), the number of ex-civil servants in the Sunday Times Rich List is  
tiny
- two of them having inherited their wealth while parading in the corridors of
power, and one who was  rich long before he became a minister.
So what did my researcher discover? Well, the number is astonishing.
Over 5 million people work for the government in the UK in one way or
another and are unlikely ever to become rich. Your odds now have improved
to twenty-eight chances in one million.
And now look around you. How many of the people you work with, the
people you socialise with, the people you see in the street, do you think have
dedicated themselves to getting rich, or are likely to do so any time soon?  
Or
have the drive or aptitude to attempt to do so? Two per cent? Three per cent?
Five per cent? Let's take 3 per cent, which I believe to be a massive overes-
timate, by the way. Personally I know only five acquaintances who dedicated
themselves to achieving success in business in order to make themselves seri-
ously rich. (As opposed to scores of senior managers or professionals known
to me who dedicated themselves to success in their business life, but allowed
others to reap the main financial rewards of their labours.)
Those five people, I might add, amount to a lot less than 3 per cent of
all the people whom I believe could have become rich had they wished to do
so. Or had they drummed up the confidence to try.
So - 3 per cent of the 30-odd million people still in the race amounts to
just under one million rivals. To reach the top thousand earners among
them, all other things being equal, you have now shortened the odds to one
chance in a thousand. Which is significantly better than the sixteen chances
in a million we began with. Now you know what Carlyle meant by lies,
damned lies and statistics.
Lastly, in any list of reasons not to get rich, we must come to philosophy
and the benefits of hindsight. If I had my time again, knowing what I know
today, I would dedicate myself to making just enough to live comfortably
(say £30 or £40 million), as quickly as I could - hopefully by the time I was
thirty-five years old. I would then cash out immediately and retire to write
poetry and plant trees.
Making money was, and still is, fun, but at one time it wreaked chaos
upon my private life. It blocked me from beginning to write poetry until my
early fifties. It consumed my waking hours. It led me into a lifestyle ofnarcotics, high-class whores, drink and consolatory debauchery. As a philos-
opher might have put it - all the usual dreary afflictions of the seeker after
wealth. These afflictions, in turn, helped to undermine my health.
But like an old, punch-drunk boxer, I couldn't quit. I always craved just
one more massive pay-day. One more appearance under the lights with the
roar of the crowd and the stink of the sawdust and leather. One more fight.
'I can take this young punk. I know I can. Just this once, so I can go out as
a winner. So I can retire as the champ. Then I'll retire. Just this last one.'
Pathetic. I should have known better. There is no such thing as a perma-
nent champ. After all, I co-wrote the first bestselling biography of
Muhammad Ali back in 1974. (You'll find it, republished as Muhammad  
Ali:
The Glory Tears on Amazon.com.) And there isn't a single fan of Muhammad
Ali who does not wish he had quit the ring several years before his failing
powers made the decision for him.
It's no excuse, but making money is a drug. Not the money itself. The
making of the money. This sounds like so much hooplah, but it's true, all
the same. Nobody believed that exercise could prove addictive until science
stepped in and discovered 'endorphins' or whatever the damn things are
called. And making money, I assure you, is a hell of a lot more of a rush
than jogging.
Up to just seven years ago I was still working twelve to sixteen hours a day
making money. With hundreds of millions of dollars in assets I just could  
not
let go. Like I said, it was pathetic. Because whoever dies with the most toys
doesn't win. Real winners are people who know their limits and respect  
them.
Eventually I found a way out. I handed over day-to-day control of my
businesses to younger and mostly smarter boys and girls. I cleaned up my
personal life. I began doing what I wanted to do - not what I felt I had to
do. After all, what did I have to prove? Except, perhaps, to myself.
It is possible that you will avoid such mistakes when you get rich. I hope
so. One thing is for sure 'the usual afflictions' are no reason not to make the
attempt. There is no reason on earth why financial success should lead to
personal catastrophe. Least of all the odds.
The odds may still appear daunting, but only to those lacking sufficient
guts and determination to try. If the odds of getting rich put you off, thenyou deserve to stay poor. Or, to put it more kindly, whether you deserve it 
or
not, you will stay poor.
But we're done here with reasons not to get rich. Our ends are not fore-
told in our beginnings. The poet was wrong there. We're heading for our
own version of The Glory Tears. We're on our way.
It's time to concentrate on getting started. To take the first step on the
long road to getting rich.
PART TWO
GETTING
S T A R T E D3
HARNESSING THE
FEAR OF FAILURE
Go tell the Spartans, thou who passeth by.
That here, obedient to their laws, we lie.
JOHN DRYDEN, ON THE SPARTANS AT THERMOPYLAE
THE EIGHT-HUNDRED-POUND GORILLA
This is the 800lb gorilla. The King Kong of your nightmares. The reason,
almost certainly, that you have not already begun to make yourself rich. He's
a big bastard, so arm wrestling is out, but he's not quite as scary as you might
think. Maybe we can bribe him with a sack of bananas? Or poison him? Or
teach him to sit up and beg? Let's see.
'Not begun until half done,' lectured John Keats gloomily in a letter to
a relative nearly two hundred years ago, Keats was a sublime poet, who died
when just twenty-five years old. Although he would rank well inside my own
top twenty favourite writers of verse in English, perhaps in the top ten, he
would have made a totally rotten entrepreneur.
I would use, instead: 'Once begun - the job's half done.' Because taking
that first, irrevocable step has proved to be the most difficult part of nearly
every venture I have been involved in.
In the memorable words of the American philosopher and poet Ralph
Waldo Emerson:
No matter how much faculty of idle seeing a man has, the step from
knowing to doing is rarely taken.
There are so many reasons not to do anything, many of them highly persua-
sive, especially in the mouth of a Jeremiah. And the world is full of
Jeremiahs. They infest our planet. In the living room, in the pub, in the
office, at the boardroom table. Everywhere you look, you will find men and
women who appear to take perverse pleasure in pointing out the shriekingly
obvious: that if a new venture does not succeed, it may result in failure.
Not that they will say so in so many words. It would be so much easier
to overcome the bulk of their objections if they did. Instead, they trot out
facts and figures, statistics and trends, charts and graphs, together with
endless reminders of failures of the past, with especial emphasis on the fail-ures of those lucky enough not to be in the room at the time. (There is rarely
any mention of their own failures, in my experience.)
They will say the company or the individual does not have the resources.
That it has all been tried before. That 'the light isn't worth the candle'.
That outside advice is required or that an individual should seek further
counsel. That the individual or company is uniquely unsuited to such an
enterprise. That it is too late, or too early, for such an idea to have any
chance of succeeding.
How many millions upon millions of man-hours are wasted annually, I
wonder, in all this doom-mongering? Personally, I've had a bellyful of it.
At the last extremity, as far as most company enterprises are concerned,
the Jeremiahs will call in the big guns, 'We must form a committee to inves-
tigate the possibility of proceeding. That's the answer. A committee. Who
shall we choose to chair the committee?'
This is the death knell, in nine cases out often, for any new venture. What
lies behind it is the desire to apportion blame that may accrue later as  
widely
as possible. If a committee is formed and eventually makes its recommenda-
tions, then future blame for either action or inaction cannot be laid at any one
person's door. In business and political jargon, this nonsense is called 'collec-
tive responsibility'. In common parlance, it is 'covering your backside'.
'A committee is a cul-de-sac down which ideas are lured and quietly
strangled,' as Sir Barnett Cocks, clerk of the House of Commons, once
pointed out. Well, Sir Barnett should certainly have known. He served on
enough of them. Or in the words of an anonymous American wit: 'A
committee is a group of the unwilling, chosen from the unfit to do the
unnecessary.' Just so. And they do it so brilliantly well. Whether in a college
dorm, or in the walnut-panelled boardroom of an international conglomer-
ate, or around your own kitchen table.
Of course, there is nothing wrong with robust debate, either with others
or with oneself. What is undesirable, however, is the pretence that any such
debate can resolve the risks involved in advance. It cannot. All debate can do
is clarify, support or contest the next step. The risks remain, however much
talking is done.
It is for this reason that committees are discouraged on the battlefield. A
commander may be proved wrong. He may be proved right. But prompt
decisions and orders, right or wrong, are far healthier than endless debateand prevarication. This applies equally to a debate within one's own mind.
Fretting is counter-productive at any level.
And so is lack of action. Knowing that fear of failure is holding you back is
a step in the right direction. But it isn't enough, because knowing isn't doing,
Knowing isn't doing what you need to do, my son;
Telling me you know is only bluffing on the run;
Knowing isn't doing;
Doing isn 't knowing;
Nothing but the knowing and the doing  gets it done.
Fear of failure and the avoidance of blame, then, is what drives Jeremiahs  
and
haunts them. To be fair, it haunts all of us. In essence, it comprises two
components. The first is our natural desire to avoid letting ourselves or
others down, perhaps with calamitous financial repercussions. The second is
the exposure of that failure to the outside world.
The majority of you reading this now are mentally nodding in agree-
ment. (Otherwise, why would you be reading a book called How to Get
Rich ?) No shame there.
Believe me, I have sat with colleagues and partners of long standing,
many of them highly experienced, and listened in disbelief while they have
talked themselves round and round in circles. Or figures of eight. Or any
configuration designed to delay the agony of saying:
'OK. Let's do it.'
Or even: 'OK. Let's forget it.'
And looking back, I have to say that I regret the majority of the times I
acquiesced in shilly-shallying and a retreat to safety. I would rather have tried
and failed, in most cases, than, have taken the safer course that so often
appears to be wiser in the abstract.
Back in the late 1970s, for example, I had a conversation with a much
older man, a senior manager at the high-street retailer, W.H. Smith. W.H.
Smith are a power in the magazine and newspaper industry. This old buffer
was friendly and helpful towards my little publishing company. I was inter-
ested in launching a personal computer magazine. He dissuaded me, warn-
ing me over and over that 'nobody would ever pay money to read monthlymagazines about dinky little computers'. Several colleagues in my company
agreed with him. After weeks of discussions, I abandoned my plans.
Shortly thereafter, another entrepreneur, Angelo Zgorelec, launched just
such a title, called Personal Computer World. It soon exhibited all the signs
of becoming a big success. Fortunately, Angelo did not have sufficient capi-
tal to promote it. In the nick of time I was able to purchase a majority stake
in the magazine, which I proceeded to sell for a small fortune four years later
to a large conglomerate.
So what is the lesson here? Because I had been dissuaded from launching
my own title, and did not own the magazine outright, I was forced to pay
Angelo a million pounds or so for his remaining share. Well done, Angelo!
Had I launched, a similar magazine myself earlier, I would have been £1
million richer in the autumn of 1982.  (Around £2.4 million in today's
money.) If I had invested that £2.4 million at a low rate of compound inter-
est, I would be £4 million richer than I am today.
That is what that well-meaning old gentleman at W.H. Smith and his
long-winded advice cost me. He cost me nearly $7 million in my pocket
right now. And whose fault was it? It was mine, for prevaricating and listen-
ing to a Jeremiah.
Let's return to the two components of fear of failure. Firstly, letting others
or yourself down and the consequent financial calamity. My response is: so
what? You may let others down if you act. You may let yourself down if you
do not act. And just how calamitous will utter failure prove to be, in any case?
Which, of course, is what gives the young and penniless such a huge advan-
tage in the race to get rich. They instinctively know what Bob Dylan preached
forty years ago: 'When you got nothin', you got nothin' to lose'.
Still, potential loss is always an important consideration. Everything will
depend on the degree of desire and belief you bring to an enterprise. What
are you willing to sacrifice to achieve it? How great is the sacrifice in reality,
as opposed to your nightmarish tears at 3 o'clock in the morning? Does  
such
a venture realty risk utter destitution? Or is it (far, far more likely) that you
fear the embarrassment of failure more than the possible financial penalty.
This nastier, stickier second component, the 'broadcasting' of our
misjudgements or errors to the rest of the world, and especially to our peers,
is often the nub of the matter. Whether I am sitting around with colleagues
at Dennis Publishing trying to figure out if we should invest millions ofpounds to launch a new car magazine, or whether a young woman, an only
child not long out of college, is considering whether to take over her father's
used-car business or invest another two years of her life into obtaining a
Ph.D. in bio-engineering - the same factors apply.
Neither decision will involve utter financial ruin, either way. But fear of
attempting something, the result of which cannot be easily hidden, weighs
heavily in the balance, whether we are aware of it or not. This applies not
only to getting rich, but to almost all business and career-related decisions.
And, perhaps, to the majority of all important decisions we make in our  
lives.
The board of directors that runs Dennis Publishing will talk earnestly and
sensibly about the effect on morale for the rest of the company (usually
forgetting to mention their own morale) in the event our proposed new
magazine bombs. (Nobody ever mentions the loss to my personal bank
balance or my morale.)
In reality, Dennis Publishing staff working, say, on The Week or Maxim
or Computer Shopper, won't give two hoots if the company's new car maga-
zine is a sensational flop. But by discussing the matter in such terms, in code
if you like, the board gives itself the opportunity to weigh their own fears
while appearing to weigh the fears of others.
Imputing desires or fears or loss of morale to others probably has a fancy
psychological monicker - like auto-displacement activity. And it's not  
always
a bad thing. At least it encourages serious communication, even if it adds little
to the decision process. Even so, it is a form of well-disguised cowardice.
On a less corporate level, the young woman mentioned above believes she
would like a career in car sales management, especially as a part-owner. She
even believes that she might be able to expand her father's business a tad  
more
aggressively than he has done in the past. On the other hand, a Ph.D. would
add status to her life and offers the prospect of a fulfilling career in science.
But she must decide. Her father is unwell and cannot wait another two
years for her decision. What if she takes over the company and it  
subsequently
goes belly up? What if she shoots for a master's degree and does not achieve  
it?
A failure to obtain her master's degree could be disguised fairly easily. Itis not likely to be broadcast to the rest of the world. After all, she already has
a degree. If failure seems likely, she can always quit, claiming she has  
become
bored with bio-engineering. The decision to take over her dad's company,
however, will be far more closely monitored — by relatives and neighbours,
by the people who work there, by rival car dealerships, by the bank manager,
and not least by her father. Should she fail, she will run the risk of  
becoming
a laughing stock or an object of pity.
So what is her best option?
Much will depend on her desires and her goals in life. She is unlikely to
get rich as a bio-engineer. But she might well get rich expanding the dealer-
ship, especially because she is aware that her father has never invested to the
extent that he might have done in marketing and promotion, especially on
the internet. There is an opportunity, but is she prepared to exploit it?
Why is she unlikely to get rich in bio-engineering? Because starring up
your own bio-engineering firm takes vast quantities of capital and the persua-
sive abilities of a Richard Branson to obtain it. The car dealership, however,
is already capitalised, and although she will have to pay off her father even-
tually, the repayments can be spread over a number of years. He is hardly
likely to foreclose on her.
So what should our young college girl do? Normally, I would hesitate to
offer any advice whatever. But I happen to know her. I was half in love with
her once. She happens to be real and her name is Julie. All this happened a
long time ago.
In the event, she took her degree and her father sold the business to an
outsider. She is a highly competent bio-engineer and has enjoyed her career
enormously. But on more than one occasion, she has told me she regrets not
taking her father up on his offer. The passage of time and a happy marriage
have softened that regret. But it's still there. It will always be, I think.
What swung the balance was her fear of failure in such a 'public' endeav-
our. Or, at least, an endeavour that felt rather public at the time. She was
young. She was a woman. She was frightened that others (especially the
male-dominated community of car sales firms) would laugh at her or  
criticise
her lack of hands-on experience, even though she would have made an  
excel-lent sales manager. She was not prepared to grow a carapace or to risk the
fear of public humiliation and say:
'To hell with them. Let's go!'
Her decision still haunts her, if only from time to time. And it irks her to
know that she will never be rich. It always irks intelligent people like Julie.
And I can give you other examples. One of them is my mother. She will be
furious (if she ever reads this) that I have mentioned her in such a book and 
such
a context. But I know my mother well. I know beyond a shadow of a doubt 
that
everything I have achieved I owe not just to care and love, but to her genes.
She could have built herself a fortune had she wished. Her personality
combines the resilience, the drive and the restless energy of so many people
who become rich. Like her eldest son, for instance. And that resilience and
restless energy was always there with my mother. As it was with me. Right
from the beginning.
But sixty years ago it was almost unheard of for a woman to act out such
ambitions. Her parents would have been scandalised. Neighbours would
have viewed such behaviour in the most negative light imaginable. Had she
failed, they would have nodded their donkey-like heads.
And had she succeeded, horror of horrors, she would have earned their
undying enmity. It just was not 'done' for a woman to earn a fortune for
herself - except, somewhat dubiously, as a movie star perhaps. Or a writer of
crime novels.
Single or newly married women from respectable families in the 1940s
and 50s were actively discouraged from involvement in business except for a
little light typing or serving in shops and department stores. Especially if they
had children. Especially if they lived in the South of England. (And this after
they had helped to win a world war on the home front! But that was consid-
ered a vile aberration.)
Never mind that my mother had more brains in her little finger than half
the twerps she worked for as an accountant. Why, women were not even
allowed to sign a hire-purchase form back then. They had to get their
husband or their brother or their father to do it!
There were a hundred obstacles and hurdles in those days, visible and
invisible, to keep women in their place - which was firmly believed to be  on
a pedestal before marriage and in the kitchen and nursery directly  
afterwards.
Fortunately for all of us, society has wised up somewhat; but the change
came too late for my mother.
So she didn't become rich. She had a decent career, that's all. She earned
enough to support my brother and me and to provide us with more than just
the necessities of life. And she married again and became a pillar of the
community. But I know that she could have done it, had she been prepared
for the unpleasantness, the sheer nastiness that would have been unleashed
upon her if she had chosen to say:
'To hell with them. Let's go!'
It was not so much a fear of failure on my mother's pan, I believe, as a
fear of upsetting the whole apple cart of the community in which she lived.
Which is why so very few women from her generation - so very, very few -
ever did do it. They cared very much about what their neighbours thought.
And now she is an elderly, if formidable lady who quietly walks her dog  
along
English country lanes.
She knows all this, of course. And she, too, knows that she will never be
rich, except through her eldest son. Which is a subtly different thing.
To sum up then, if you wish to be rich, you must grow a carapace. A mental
armour. Not so thick as to blind you to well-constructed criticism and
advice, especially from those you trust. Nor so thick as to cut you off from
friends and family.
But thick enough to shrug off the inevitable sniggering and malicious
mockery that will follow your inevitable failures. Not to mention the poorly
hidden envy that will accompany your eventual success. Few things in life  
are
certain except death and being taxed. But sniggering and mockery prior to  
any
attempt to better yourself financially, followed by envy later, or gloating 
during
your initial failures - these are three certainties in life. It hurts. It's mindless.
And it doesn't mean anything. But it will happen. Be prepared to shrug it off.
The Germans have a superb word for the (secret) pleasure humans
obtain from the misfortunes of others. It is Schadenfreude - from schadenmeaning 'harm' (from which we get the word 'shadow'), and. freude. mean-
ing 'joy'. Those of you who are definitely going to be rich will recognise it
often enough in the faces and body language of idiots around you. It is the
price you must learn to pay for any attempt to raise yourself in the world.
And I suspect that was as true ten thousand years ago as it is today.
Now comes the hard part. Before we really get started on getting started,
I ask you to consider carefully the short list below. It is by no means  
compre-
hensive, nor will it be the last list in this book, but should you find yourself
unable to measure up to even one of these initial demands (and I mean just
owe), then my suggestion is that you close this book and give it to a friend,
or an enemy - depending on the degree to which you enjoy ironical gestures.
O If you are unwilling to fail, sometimes publicly, and even catastrophically,
you stand very little chance of ever getting rich.
O If you care what the neighbours think, you will never get rich.
O If you cannot bear the thought of causing worry to your family, spouse
or lover while you plough a lonely, dangerous road rather than taking the
safe option of a regular job, you will never get rich.
O If you have artistic inclinations and fear that the search for wealth will
coarsen such talents or degrade them, you will never get rich. (Because
your fear, in this instance, is well justified.)
O If you are not prepared to work longer hours than almost anyone you know,
despite the jibes of colleagues and friends, you are unlikely to get rich.
Q If you cannot convince yourself that you are 'good enough' to be rich,
you will never get rich.
O  If you cannot treat your quest to get rich as a game, you will never be rich.If you can dream — and not make dreams your master;
If you can think - and not make thoughts you aim;
If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster
And treat those two impostors just the same ...
RUDYARD KIPLINC, 'IF'
O If you cannot face up to your fear of failure, you will never be rich.
The truth is that getting rich means sacrifice. And the worst of it is, it isn't
always you that's doing the sacrificing. You must get used to that, or give up
the quest. This is not a calling for the faint-hearted. There is no shame in
turning away. After all, if everyone was prepared to make the necessary sacri-
fices, who would be left to work for my own companies?
Quite apart from sacrifice, there is a last brutal truth to be confronted. If
the fear of failure is holding you back - and it almost certainly is - then what
strategies can be devised to set you free? No book, including mine, can do it
for you. All I can do is alert you to the problem and suggest a course of action.
Here is my suggestion. Think of this fear not as the King Kong of bogeymen,
but as a mare. A nightmare. A mare, after all, is a horse. A horse can be tamed,
bridled, saddled, harnessed and (eventually) ridden. Harnessing the power of
such a creature adds mightily to your own. Thus the nightmare of prospective
failure provides you with the very opportunity you are seeking. Not only does it
restrain smarter people than yourself from becoming rich - and there can only be
so many rich people in the world - it affords you the chance of increasing your
confidence, both when you confront it and when you master it.
For make no mistake, if you will not confront and harness this all-too
human emotion in one way or another, then you are doomed to remain rela-
tively poor. You either get over it, go round it, go at it, mount it, duck under
it or cosy up to it. But you cannot surrender to it. That way lies paralysis,
prevarication, ignominy and defeat.
After a lifetime of making money and observing better men and women
than I fall by the wayside, I am convinced that fear of failing in the eyes of the
world is the single biggest impediment to amassing wealth. Trust me on this.
If you shy away for any reason whatever, then the way is blocked. The
gate is shut - and will remain shut. You will never get started. You will never
get rich.
4THE SEARCH
Until one is committed, there is hesitancy; the chance to draw
back; always ineffectiveness concerning all acts of initiative and
creation. There is one elemental truth., the ignorance of which
kills countless ideas and splendid plans: that the moment one
commits oneself, Providence moves all. All sorts of things occur
to help one that would never otherwise have occurred. A whole
stream of events issue from the decision, raising in one's favour
all manner of incidents and meetings and material assistance
which no one could have dreamed would come his or her way.
JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
WAITING FOR GODOT
'What do you want to be when you're grown up?' is the dreaded, inane cry
from well-meaning aunts and uncles to infant children. This morphs soon
enough into anxious queries about examination results. By the time college
is on the horizon, many teenagers are ready to wreak physical violence upon
adults who pester them with thinly veiled questions and tedious advice
concerning their future career.
This probably happened to you, just as it did to most of us. The best
response I ever heard came a few years back from one of my godchildren, deliv-
ered with a serene smile and carefully articulated irony to a nosy neighbour:
"Oh, I'm going to be rap god, Mrs Milburn, and pimp half your Brownies.'
The Brown Owl who had asked him was anything but amused.
Just at the very time hormonal chaos, acne, drugs, alcohol, sport, fashion,
gadgets, cars, music, body piercing, partying and sex are emerging as matters 
of
compelling interest, we find ourselves faced with an eternal mantra about earn-
ing a crust. All of this is irritating in the extreme, mostly because it harps upon
what is patently obvious - that one day we are going to have to make a Living.
And yet, there is a kernel of wisdom buried in the pulp of these
parental and family concerns. The truth is that the vast majority of peopledoing the asking did not choose their own career. Either they stumbled
into it or they were pushed.
Knowing this, adults are often subconsciously seeking, however clumsily,
to nag the young into confronting as early as possible the biggest decision
over which any of us is likely to exercise real control. We do not choose our
parents. We do not choose our nationality. We do not choose who we fall in
love with. We do not even choose the personality or character of the children
we bring into the world or even our own personal characteristics - random
configurations of DNA do it for us.
But we do get to choose, if we are determined enough, what it is we want
to do for a living. Most of us flunk this test. Me, for instance. My career as
an entrepreneur magazine publisher came about entirely by accident. If you
had asked me when I was eighteen years old what I would be doing for the
next thirty years, I would have told you I was going to be one of the biggest
R&B singers in the world.
That didn't happen, and if I'm honest about it, I'm still a little disgusted
with myself that I quit the dream so early. But, hey, I was getting tired of
stealing food and bumming other people's cigarettes and not having the rent
money. It was no fun shinning down a drainpipe to ensure I avoided meet-
ing my landlady in the hall.
And in any case, I had an appointment. It wasn't one of my own choos-
ing, but it came along all the same,
ESTRAGON: Charming spot. Inspiring prospects. Let's go.
VLADIMIR We can't.
ESTRAGON: Why not?
VLADIMIR: We're waiting for Godot.
SAMUEL BECKETT, WAITING FOR GODOT
Who never arrives. So is it such a terrible thing that the vast majority of us
settle for what comes along rather than making a career plan and sticking  
with
it? And how do you get to decide what career you might excel at anyway?
Most parents and teachers reading this are not going to like my answer.
It's this: none of it matters a damn if you want to get rich.This is not to say that 'the Search' is not important to young people. It's
important and it's scary and it's fun and infuriatingly confusing. For most
people, it occurs in their twenties or very early thirties. For a small number,
the Search is over by their teens, either because they have a shriekingly obvi-
ous talent or because they have already spent too many hours hanging out in
the wrong company.
For the rest of us, though, the Search is a lot scarier than we usually care
to acknowledge. And this arises, ironically, from the success of Western
Democracies, those with a capital 'W' and a capital 'D'. They have provided
too much choice for younger citizens. Nobody but an idiot would deny this
is a good thing - even a wonderful thing. But choices are confusing. They
take time to consider, to sample, spit out and reject. And too many of them
provide a ready-made excuse for procrastination and shilly-shallying.
Not to mention fantasising. It came as a shock to me to read in The Week
that 20 per cent of British teenagers in school claim they would abandon their
education if they could just get themselves on television. In any capacity  
what-
ever. Just to be a 'celebrity'. Which probably explains the queues clamouring
to be humiliated on 'reality TV', a modern equivalent to ancient Rome's glad-
iator circuses. That is, it came as a shock until I remembered my own  
certainty
at seventeen that I would knock The Rolling Stones flat on their ass.
All of us have our dreams. And these are not to be despised or mocked.
They are a part of us, whatever they are.
If you want to serve your fellow man, then go do it (and God bless you).
If you want the status of being a professional - a professor or a lawyer or an
economist, then go do it. If you want to be secure so that you can marry and
raise kids, then choose the civil service, because bureaucrats never go out of
style and pensions for senior civil servants these days appear to be gold-
plated. If you want to be a world-class writer, musician or athlete or movie
producer, then go do it - it won't be that long before you discover whether
you have the talent to hack it or not.
In other words, if you feel absolutely moved towards a particular voca-
tion, then that's exactly where you should head. But be aware that if you
want to make huge sums of money, then earning a living by slowly swarm-
ing up the greasy pole is rarely the way to do it.
For a start, the salary begins to have an attraction and addictiveness all ofits own. A regular paycheck and crack cocaine have that in common. In  
addi-
tion, and more to the point, working too long for other people can blunt  
your
desire to take risks. This last factor is crucial, because the ability to live with 
and
embrace risk is what sets apart the financial winners and losers in the world.
If you want to be rich, you are not looking for a 'career', except as a
launch pad or as a chance to infiltrate and understand a particular industry.
A job for the rich-in-training is merely something to keep you ticking over,
to put food on your plate and wine in your glass.
Additionally, it will provide excellent training in man-management and
negotiation skills; it will supply inside market information; above all, it will
act as a salutary reminder of what happens to 99.99 per cent of your
colleagues - the ones who buy lottery tickets and dream of becoming rich
but who haven't a hope in hell of achieving any such thing.
Sounds pretty arrogant and selfish, doesn't it? Not exactly 'playing the
game' or exhibiting what a human resources manager would call 'a construc-
tive team attitude'. But then, who ever heard of a rich human resources
manager? Right. Neither have I. And, in any case, if you do the thing right,
there is no reason why such a manager need ever know. Or care.
So if you want to be rich and you are in the Search phase of your life,
then get used to one thing. You are not part of a team— although you may
have to pretend you are. To put it more politely, you may have to adopt the
idea of teamwork, for the time being, to help yourself understand better how
individuals, departments, companies or industries function.
You should certainly do so enthusiastically and conscientiously. But in
your secret heart, however hard you work (and if you want to be rich, work-
ing a damn sight harder than the punk next to you is the only sensible
option), you must not be deceived.
Working for others is a reconnaissance expedition; a means and not an
end in itself. It is an apprenticeship and not a goal.
You should have no long-term, or even medium-term, requirements of
the first two or three companies you work for. Promotion is always welcome
and brings with it the opportunity to learn more, but you are there to ensure
that you take every opportunity to suck out the marrow of what you need to
know, to understand it and place it within a greater context for a futurepurpose. The purpose of getting rich.
Team spirit is for losers, financially speaking. It's the glue that binds the
losers together. It's the methodology employers use to shackle useful
employees to their desk without having to pay them too much. While lives
may depend on it in a few professions, like soldiering or fire-fighting, in
commerce it acts as a subtle handicap and a brake to ambitious individuals.
Which, in a way, is what it's designed to do.
Here's an example. Back in the early 1980s, I launched Star Hits maga-
zine in the USA. It was based on the highly successful pop-music rag Smash
Hits in Britain,
I negotiated a deal with EMAP, the owners of Smash Hits, to pay them a
small royalty on each copy we sold in America. In return, they helped me to
hire a couple of their Smash Hits staff who were willing to relocate to New
York City and work for me there. One of these guys was an editor called Neil
Tennant, a young man with a wry smile and the look of eagles about him.
Launching a magazine is an exhausting process. Most magazines fail
within two years, and although it lasted a little longer than that, Star Hits
was destined for a short, if spectacular, existence. But we didn't know that in
1984. British pop groups were popular at that time in America - especially a
group called Duran Duran. Being associated with the mighty Smash Hits in
England gave us an edge in obtaining photographs and interviews. Star Hits
took off like a rocket in America.
In no time at all we were selling hundreds of thousands of copies each
month. Letters from readers arrived in their thousands from every corner of
the country and the sacks piled up in the hall of our pokey New York City
midtown offices. The staff of Star Hits worked all hours of the day and night
and were fiercely determined the magazine should succeed. Nearly all of  
them
were young, and for some of them this was only their second or third job.
My small company's financial resources were limited, which meant that
people on the magazine were often promoted quickly, Neil Tennant quickly
found himself the editor of one of the hottest magazines in America. NewYork City lay at his feet. His desk was entirely swamped by tottering piles of
promotional material sent by record companies. He could get backstage at
any gig, from huge arenas like Madison Square Garden to hip, crowded
nightclubs downtown. Managers and PR agents vied for his attention. He
flew anywhere he wanted and interviewed whoever took his fancy. This was  
a
dream job and Neil was on top of the world.
Morale and team spirit in the office were high, too. Staff were not
required to wear suits or ties and as long as the job got done, nobody cared
what anyone looked like or bothered them with corporate rules or red tape.
Neil and the staff of Star Hits were having a whale of a time. I was kind of
enjoying it myself.
Late one afternoon he sauntered into my office. He was holding a
cassette tape which he tapped with his fingernail as he slumped on a battered
chair and stared at me, half sheepishly, half defiantly. 'Felix, I'm going to
leave Star Hits,'' he said. 'I've been working on some numbers and I think I
have a real chance of making a go of it. Listen to these and tell me what you
think.' Later that evening I played the tape (which I still have in my
archives). It was not my kind of music, but one particular song, 'West End
Girls', I think, was a stand-out. I had vaguely known of Neil's personal inter-
est in recording, but had never dreamed he would risk such a fantastic job
for the vagaries of becoming a pop star.
I went to work on him the next day. How I would be happy to pay him
more money. How Star Hits was poised on the brink of greatness. How he
would be certain to be offered even more glamorous editorial jobs by my
competitors if he stuck it out. Above all, I pointed out how disappointed and
let down his editorial team would be.
No dice. Neil was right. The Pet Shop Boys became huge stars. On his
last day, at a small office leaving party, he told me that within a year he would
make the front cover of Star Hits in his own right. And he did, too!
When it comes right down to it, 'team spirit' and not letting your
colleagues down is a feeble reason for procrastination when opportunity
comes knocking. Nearly always, it is an excuse to avoid the possibility of
humiliating failure. If one of the team you work with inherited ten million
quid tomorrow, do you really believe they would be checking in to keep up
morale? Of course not. Neither would you, or anyone in their right mind.Which leads us to a note of caution. Those who can never be rich may
not want you to become rich. That's an ugly thing to say, but unless you
realise and accept that you cannot be 'one of the boys', that your bosses and
you are not 'in this thing together', that only those who refuse to be conned
by the idea of 'team spirit' in the workplace can succeed - unless you come
to fully comprehend and understand all this, then you will only make other
people rich. You will receive their heartfelt thanks and maybe a gold watch
when you retire. But you will not get the money!
It's the same with close friends and family members. Consciously and
outwardly they may want you to succeed beyond your wildest dreams. But
subconsciously, often without being aware of it themselves, they might be  
far
happier if you failed or only succeeded to a limited degree.
It's a selfish world out there. But, hey! when you've piled up your first
few million in the bank, you can salve your conscience by giving  
generously
to your relatives. Or by promoting young managers and waffling on to
them about 'team spirit' in your own business. Not that the brightest of
them will believe you for a moment. (They're the ones you promote fastest,
by the way.)
What else is there to consider during the Search? Some industries are
more enticing and glamorous than others. Some require huge investment to
get off the ground and some can be made to work in an attic or a garage.
And some are growing while others are in decline. Should you choose only
to work in glamorous, growing industries? Where is the most opportunity to
be found?
First off, forget glamorous. One of the richest self-made men I know digs
holes in the ground to dispose of household waste. That's not how his
company describes itself in its annual report, but essentially that is what it
does, along with building incineration plants.
Glamorous? No. But in a good year he puts £20-£30 million on the
bottom line and earns a gross margin of over 20 per cent. That's a sensa-
tional result for a small, wholly owned private company. Not to mention that
the relentless growth of the packaged-goods industry ensures that his busi-
ness will grow and grow virtually by default - providing he can find enough
places to dig holes, that is.
While you may not necessarily want to be in a glamorous sector of any
market, and they are often very crowded sectors, it helps to be inone. Swimming with the ride rather than against it, so to speak. A swelling
tide raises all boats, including yours.
On the other side of the 'glamorous' coin, very few of those who want
their picture on the front cover of Vogue, or wish to become a movie direc-
tor or to run the coolest PR company in the world, get to achieve anything.
The reason is obvious. The laws of supply and demand are absolute - and
they apply not only to commodities, but to people. Too many people want
to make a blockbuster movie and live in Beverly Hills. Not enough people
want to dig holes.
New or rapidly developing industries, whether glamorous or not, very
often provide more opportunities to get rich than established sectors. The
three reasons for this are availability of risk capital, ignorance and the power
of a rising tide.
Investors are drawn to emerging industries in the hope of making a fast
buck. To get rich, you will need capital, and to acquire capital you need to
be where loose capital is searching for a home. In addition, the combination
of ignorance and misconception that surrounds any new market or technol-
ogy works in your favour. If you are quick at grasping concepts and jargon,
you become an 'instant expert'. The owners of capital love 'experts'.
Finally, the power of a rising tide masks many start-up difficulties,
putting individuals and small companies on a more even footing with
conglomerates and established operators; for a while, at least.
I've had personal experience of this craziness. Back in the late 1970s I
knew nothing of personal computers. And I mean, literally, nothing. The
only PC I had ever seen was built by a nerd from a kit. It appeared to allow
the nerd and his fellow nerds to play a pathetic video game called 'Pong'. On
top of that, it permitted like-minded nerds to converse with each other in a
jargon beyond the understanding of non-nerd mortals. To sum up, PCs were
for trainspotters.
This was not exactly promising ground for an entrepreneurial publishing
company. Even so, the enthusiasm of these nerds and of science journalists in
the mainstream press concerning the potential of personal computers was
growing. To cut a long story short (and a story which has still not ended
thirty years later), my tiny little company became 'instant experts' on personal
computing. We launched magazine after magazine on the subject, both trade
and consumer based, and established several exhibitions.
Our acquisition of apparent 'expert' knowledge, together with all ournew launches, bred respect among our vendors, primarily paper merchants
and printers. They vied to offer us far better credit terms than they would
normally have considered offering. This provided me with desperately
needed capital to expand.
As magazine publishers, we could not hold a candle to our bigger rivals,
and no one knew this better than they. But at least we appeared to know
what we were doing, which in turn attracted editorial talent who really did
know. Better still, the tide of personal computing technology rose high -
higher than anyone could have predicted, and it rose quicker than anyone
had thought possible.
Here was the power of a new market at work. By the time our bigger
rivals were comfortable enough to launch against us (a hesitation resulting
from ignorance), the tide had carried us beyond the reach of their big guns.
New capital, ignorance and a rising tide had done the trick. In this instance,
the Search had paid off in spades.
As a general rule of thumb, then, growing industries with relatively low
start-up costs offer more opportunities for those who want to get rich than
declining industries, or those that require huge start-up investment. This is
not an iron-clad rule, however. While magazine and newspaper sales have
been in slow decline in the Western world for decades, this 'declining' indus-
try is where I made a great deal of my own money.
More important than any particular industry are the sectors within each
industry. A sizeable fish in a growing sector, however small, is more attrac-
tive to prospective purchasers and investors than the same size fish in a
diminishing or static pond.
This is one of the factors in stock-market bubbles - all growth is good
(as far as investors are concerned), while all decline is fatal. I happen to
believe that such sentiments are flawed. But what I believe is immaterial. It's
what the providers of capital believe that counts, no matter how illogical.
After all, what are banks and venture capitalists but usurers who offer you an
umbrella when the sun is shining and snatch it away the instant a few rain
clouds appear? (Ah, the old jokes are the best jokes.)
I do know of a few examples of self-made multi-millionaires from static
industries, especially in commodities, publishing and precious metals, who
were lucky enough to persuade banks and venture capitalists to back them
with millions of dollars. Of course, this means that they rarely remain in
control of their own destiny.Capitalism demands that whoever takes the most financial risk calls the
piper's tune. The biggest rewards go not to those individuals who came up
with the idea, nor to those individuals who built the empire. They go to
those entities or individuals who funded the enterprise and own the most
stock. Always bear this in mind during the Search.
This is the system you are pledged to both join and beat. To join because
you need to get rich. And to beat because you have insufficient capital.
Either by appearing to join those who will financially back you (while hold-
ing on grimly to every piece of stock you can), or by piecing together just
enough success to borrow enough money to grow without disposing of your
sacred shares, (See Chapter 12: Ownership! Ownership! Ownership! )
Depressingly, the only way for a start-up entrepreneur to succeed is often
to part with equity in return for an infusion of capital. But never forget that
no matter what promises or verbal guarantees you receive from investors
during the Search, the issue will eventually come down to control. And
control, even by a single per cent of the shares of a business, the fabled
51-49 per cent split, is often the be-all and end-all of the game. (See Chapter
6: Obtaining Capital .)
Whoever controls a business can force its sale. Whoever controls a busi-
ness can implement a merger. Whoever controls a business can fire you.
Whoever controls a business, even by a pitiful 1 per cent, is likely to take a
great deal more money out of it than the minority shareholders. Remember,
too, that in both private and public companies, not all shares are necessarily
equal, either in voting power or financial value. Choosing a growing industy,
or growing sector of a static industry, can free you from such financial
control freaks.
To gain control of a company, investors often pay well over the odds.
However, those still clinging to the residue, even though they are protected
from 'oppression' by the majority shareholder in law, rarely see equal value
when all is said and done. For a minority shareholder who helped found a
company, this can be a bitter pill to swallow. They may even have sold some
of their shares to ensure the company's viability, only to discover that having
won such a battle, they have lost the war.
This is especially true in start-ups, and even more true in start-ups that do
not require substantial capital investment. While engaged in the Search 
yourself,
spare a thought for the software giants of today, most of which were founded 
inbasements, spare bedrooms and garages a quarter of a century ago. They went
through the Search themselves. The search for a niche. The search for  
funding.
Once upon a time, the chance was there, for those who could see it, to
get in on the ground floor of this potentially huge industry. To most of the
geeks and nerds who slaved away creating primitive operating systems and
applications (for which there were no known uses), one or two percentage
points of their tiny companies appeared to them to be, literally, neither here
nor there. Few inventors or 'creative types' make very good managers or
businessmen, in case you hadn't noticed.
But today, those one or two percentage points would be worth hundreds
of millions of dollars in hard cash. Inch by inch, share by share, the nerds
diluted to gain capital to expand and survive. Eventually, the majority of
them lost control of their tiny companies. Many became salaried employees
of the company they had helped to found. Much depended on whether they
lost control prior to or after a public stock offering, but we needn't go into
that here.
Just a few, a very few, held on to enough stock to become immensely
wealthy. Ownership is power. Ask Bill Gates of Microsoft or Larry Ellison of
Oracle. But don't ask the guy who claims to have invented the world's first
computerised spreadsheet. Last time I heard, he was living on welfare in a
crummy district of San Francisco.
But we are getting ahead of ourselves. The division of spoils comes only
when there are spoils to divide. So how to choose the arena in which you
intend to carve yourself a fortune? There are usually three factors involved in
the Search; inclination, aptitude and fate.
We all have inclinations of one sort or another. To me, spending an after-
noon inside the bonnet of a classic car with an oily rag for company is my
idea of hell. Yet a retired friend of mine works on the two classic Rolls-
Royces I own whenever he gets the chance - and enjoys it so much he  
refuses
to accept payment. On the other hand, how many other people would
consider working eighteen hours straight on a complicated poem as a way to
'enjoy' themselves? There's 'nowt as strange as folk', as my Yorkshire friends
never tire of reminding me.
Your inclinations really do count. You have to pay attention to them. If,
like me for example, you abhor television, then it probably isn't a good idea
to move into that industry, unless you had a yen to direct or write for thesmall screen. A different thing entirely than watching TV night after night.
If you love art, but cannot paint or sculpt to save your life, then perhaps
you can still make your millions in the art world - providing you possess not
only a natural affinity and sense of aesthetic, but the wit to spot and winkle
out talent in young artists. Plus the ability to sell, which is usually nothing
more than a talent for hype and keeping a straight face as you demand a fifty
times mark-up from potential buyers who wouldn't know a Damien Hirst
from a pickled sardine.
An understanding and passionate affinity with any subject, in combina-
tion with effective management, sales and marketing techniques, could well
provide a tailor-made solution to the Search. Cherish your inclinations and
affinities. Though not infallible, they may well lead you in the right direc-
tion. But do not fall into the error of making a fetish of your passion. You're
reading this book to get rich. Not to confirm your own prejudices regarding
those talents or inclinations you may have.
Because aptitude is a very different kettle of fish. Few of us are lucky
enough to be born with a talent so obvious that the Search is never an obsta-
cle to progress. Yet even here, inclination may prove a stumbling block to  
real
wealth. One of the best sales people I ever employed, and one who was so
conscious of her ability that I was forced to pay her nearly twice the salary  
and
bonus of her immediate boss, now lives in Cornwall and paints watercolours.
They are not very good watercolours, in my opinion. But neither my
opinion, nor the promise that she would be a multi-millionaire before she was
thirty-five, proved a sufficient inducement to keep her nose to the grindstone.
The aptitude for selling advertising was obvious, and was the envy of all her
colleagues. But her inclinations led elsewhere. She is happy as far as I know
and I wish her all the luck in the world. But she will never be rich.  
Fortunately,
she says she has no wish to be.
So how do you judge your own aptitudes? Trial and error is the only way
I ever heard of. The problem is that we create an image of ourselves in our
childhood and youth (often at the urging of parents, siblings or friends), and
subsequently attempt to graft reality onto this image. More often than not, the
graft doesn't take and the result is bewilderment and disappointment. Far
better to ruthlessly analyse what your particular aptitudes are and act uponthem rather than attempt to graft an oak tree onto a dandelion.
If you are still young, here is where the advice of a godparent, a trusted
teacher or lecturer, or even a career counsellor can prove usefull, bearing in
mind that impartiality is a better guide than parental pride. Your parents,  
likely
as not, will be of little use here. Their love for you may well blind them to the
harsher realities of your true abilities and potential. There are a great many
doctors and lawyers who apprenticed themselves to their profession solely to
please an ambitious parent - only later to regret their acquiescence at leisure.
If you do decide to ask for advice concerning your true aptitudes, then
preparation shows you are serious and will be more likely to effect a serious
response. As a godparent, I am always willing to discuss the matter, but  
only
if my godchild has prepared a list of questions and suggestions, and only in
private. Casual conversations around a family living room, with others stick-
ing their oar in or trying to show off with banter and smart remarks, are
tedious and counter-productive. For ambitious young people this is a serious
matter and deserves to be taken seriously.
Of course, such discussions cannot make you rich. But they can really
help in the Search. They can build confidence, a key element in risk taking,
and the only way I know of to get rich from a standing start. And they can
inform you, too, of your weaknesses, which in turn can protect you from
spending your working life making other people rich - the probable fate of
nearly everyone you currently know.
If you are older, and by older I mean in your thirties, then the matter
becomes far more difficult. I would say almost impossible, as far as advice is
concerned.
How many of us at that age know somebody to whom we can say: 'What
do you truly believe my strong points to be?' and expect a meaningful
answer? And even if we can find someone we feel comfortable discussing
such a subject with, how many of us know anyone whose opinion is worth
the potential embarrassment? Blind faith and trial and error are just about all
that's left unfortunately. There ought to be a better way, but no one I know
has ever stumbled across it.
Inclinations are easy to list. Aptitude is far less so. Trial and error,
combined with fierce determination and a willingness to discard cherished
perceptions about ourselves, is the best that I can suggest.It is highly unsatisfactory and frustrating that the most important decision
we are likely to consciously make leaves so very much to chance. A small 
success,
though - even a tiny success - can provide a clue. It was my own success at 
sell-
ing magazines on the street that. led me to begin to publish them eventually.
Which leads to fate. To chance. To serendipity. And, to a lesser extent,
to the shared social delusion of the supernatural. I do not believe myself to
be any more superstitious than the next person, although it is true that I find
myself knocking on an actual piece of wood just a little too often for comfort.
Even so, as a history and biography buff, it always amazes me how the self-
made rich appear irresistibly drawn toward the mines in which they will exca-
vate their fortunes. What led them there? How did they know where to turn?
It is the instinct to seize an opportunity when it presents itself that
perhaps sets apart the self-made filthy rich from the comfortably poor, the
willingness to ignore conventional wisdom and risk everything on what
others consider to be folly. One could even argue that it hardly mattered that
young Henry Ford was drawn to automobiles, or that Ruben Rausing chose
packaging, or that Bill Gates gravitated to software to create those vast
fortunes. I would be open to persuasion that had their roles, and the century
in which they lived, been reversed, they would have done just as well and
raised themselves every inch as high from the common herd financially.
Their ability to take chances and to subsequendy exploit initial success
counted more than their inclination towards a particular industry. Their
execution of a strategy trumped the subject of their obsession.
Luck? Fate? Chance? Although I am reluctant to even write these words,
without them, it appears, nothing can be done. (See Chapter 10: A Few
Words About Luck .) While it infuriates me to admit it, there are just too
many people I am acquainted with who appear to draw bad luck to them for
this not to be so. If the influence of luck is a delusion, then all I can say is
that the delusion is virtually universal.
The filthy rich are not gods. They are men and women who put on their
underwear in the morning pretty much as you do. It is true that they were in
the right place at the right time and did the right thing. The difference is that
in some way they placed themselves in fate's way, then grasped her by the 
fore-
lock as she sprinted past. ('Lady Luck is bald behind', says the old proverb.)To put it less fancifully, they w rere lucky in the Search and skilful in their
follow-up. Boldness helped. Conquering fear of failure helped. Persistence
helped. But, without some luck, no one can get anywhere in the search to
discover the exact arena in which to do battle, the arena that suits an indi-
vidual's aptitudes and inclinations.
Boldness? The most successful generals or admirals in military history
shared one characteristic: they were willing to ignore orders and risk utter
disgrace in order to exploit rapidly changing circumstances. When the
chance came, they recognised an opportunity, weighed the odds swiftly, and
placed their lives and careers on the line to snatch a victory. (Not to mention
the lives and careers of those around them.)
The three great quotes concerning 'luck' for me are these:
'Luck is preparation multiplied by opportunity.'
SENECA, ROMAN PHILOSOPHER
'The harder I practised, the luckier I got.'
GARY PLAYER, GOLF CHAMPION
'Luck is a dividend of sweat. '
RAY Kroc, MCDONALD'S FOUNDER
Fortune favours not just the brave but the bold. Boldness has a kind of  
genius
in it, as Goethe pointed out. It can lead to complete failure and defeat,
because conventional wisdom often proves to be at least wisdom of a kind.
But should boldness succeed, should the chance be seized and sufficiently
well executed, then success will surely lead to glory.
All around us, every day, opportunities to get rich are popping up. The
more alert you are, the more chance you have of spotting them. The more
preparation you have done, the more chance you have of succeeding. Themore bold you are, the better chance you have of getting in on the ground
floor and confounding the odds. The more self-belief you can muster, the
more certain will be your aim and your timing. And the less you care what
the neighbours think, the more likely you are to take the plunge and exploit
an opportunity.
Here is the key, then, in the Search. Whatever your inclinations, your
aptitude, your abilities or your preferences, never shrink when opportunities
arrive. If you have weighed the odds and find yourself convinced, ignore the
protestations of sensible people and their conventional caution.
Seize Lady Luck by the forelock and hang on for your life. More men
and women have become rich by this single tactic than all 'the best-laid plans
of mice and men' guided by plodding strategy.
Chances come to everyone in life, in all shapes and sizes, often disguised,
and more often radiating risk and potential humiliation. Those who are
prepared to analyse the risk, to bear the humiliation and to act in deadly
earnest — these arc the 'lucky' ones who will find themselves, when the music
stops, holding a potful of money.
But then, in reality, they made their own luck. They never stopped
searching. Perhaps they spent months or even years searching in the wrong
place. Or possibly they hit upon the object of their search at the first attempt.
No matter.
Having found what they needed where they needed it, and having done
what they judged needed doing, their search is over. And it is they who will
become rich.
5
THE FALLACY OF
THE GREAT IDEA
Between the idea
And the reality'
Between the motion
And the act
Falls the shadowT. S. ELIOT, 'THE HOLLOW MEN'
'I'VE JUST HAD THIS GREAT IDEA . . .'
The novelist and poet Vladimir Nabokov may have been coming it a bit high
when he told an interviewer in the mid-1960s that 'great ideas are hogwash' 
and
that 'style and structure are the essence of a book'. In the real world, at least,
ideas are not hogwash. But they are very unlikely to make you rich on their 
own.
More importantly, it really does not matter who gives birth to any partic-
ular idea. This is borne out by the laws relating to patents and inventions.
You cannot patent an idea. You can only patent your own method for imple-
menting an idea. It is for this reason that so many people have become rich
despite never having had a single great idea in their lives. As it happens, I
count myself among them.
It is good to have a goal. True believers in a 'great idea' are often
obsessed with achieving a particular goal. Such an obsession, properly
harnessed, can produce wealth. Sadly, that wealth rarely finds its way into the
pockets of the person whose obsession created it. As far as this book is
concerned, their goal was flawed even though their aim was true.
Take a small example. Decades ago, my old friend Tony Elliott was deter-
mined to force British television and broadcasting companies to permit him
to publish their forthcoming programme schedules in his London weekly
magazine, Time Out. The BBC and ITV, among others, were aghast. They
were making a fortune by licensing their schedules for the week ahead  
exclu-
sively to Radio Times and TV Times.
Tony's great idea was simple. He wanted to break that cosy monopoly and
force the broadcasters to release their schedules to any publisher who
requested them. Alongside Time Out reviews and listings of movies, plays,
concerts, restaurants and all the rest, he planned to include a comprehensive
television-viewing guide. This was certainly a laudable goal and not a bad 
idea.
But the goal, in and of itself, could only produce so many extra readers.
In addition, should he succeed, this would mean that a great many other
publishers would obtain access to these television schedules and publish
them in their own magazines. Many of these publishers were rivals, at least
on the newsstand, to Time Out. In addition, taking on the television broad-casters in a long drawn-out legal battle was likely to be an expensive under-
taking. To sum up, was the light worth the candle?
Tony thought so. He sought allies and found them. He spent real money
in legal fees on his campaign. He became obsessed with this goal for a  
while,
or at ieast, it seemed that way to me, ignoring even his own staff's concerns
that there might be more important battles to fight and more pressing issues
to address.
Eventually, after a long and gruelling battle, Tony won a victory. But
only a victory of sorts. Television broadcasting schedules, to a degree, moved
into the public domain. Many magazines could now publish them.
And what happened? I expect Time Out's sales went up, briefly, when its
fully fledged television listings appeared. But I would bet considerable
money they did not go up anything like enough to repay the legal costs and
lost management time Tony must have incurred.
Worse still, it was mostly other magazine publishers in Britain who
reaped the real harvest, and continue to do so. Today, UK retail shelves are
groaning with magazines that carry television Listings. Tony's great idea was
a great idea. But it proved to be an even better idea for other publishers.
Fortunately, Time Out has since gained a large UK subscriber base and
has stabilised newsstand sales in Britain, Better still, it has established several
foreign editions, most notably in New York City, which have done vastly
more to improve Tony's fortunes than his noble battle with the emperors of
television all those years ago.
Having a great idea is simply not enough. The eventual goal is vastly
more important than any idea. It is how ideas are implemented that counts
in the long run.
Good ideas are like Nike sports shoes. They may facilitate an athlete who
possesses them, but on their own they are nothing but an over-priced pair of
plimsolls. Specially adapted plimsolls may be a good idea. But the goal is  
still
to win, and sports shoes don't win. Athletes do.
And yet I have lost count of the number of men and women who have
approached me with their 'great idea', as if this, in and of itself, was some
passport to instant wealth. The idea is not a passport. At most, it is the means
of obtaining one.Ray Kroc, of McDonald's fame, did not invent the idea of 'fast food'.
Humans have been stuffing their face 'on the run' since the dawn of history.
His genius was merely to recognise this fact and implement a simple five-
point plan: standardise the food and prices, franchise the outlets, produce the
food swiftly in clean surroundings, offer value for money and market the
whole shebang relentlessly.
Easy to state; hard to implement. And it flew in the face of all conven-
tional wisdom concerning the sale of fast food at the time.
But it was the implementation of th is plan that turned a 52-year-old milk-
shake-mixer salesman with diabetes and asthma into a billionaire. Every
clement of his plan had been 'discovered' years before. There were thou-
sands of 'fast food' outlets in the USA at the time, including a few owned by
the McDonald brothers, from whom he purchased his own outlets.
Yet it was Kroc's McDonald's that emerged as the ultimate market
leader, not just because of a 'great idea' but through unremitting sweat and
adherence to core principles. Personally, I despise fast food, and consume it
only when there is no alternative. But Ray Kroc's story remains a testimony
to the ability of an entrepreneur to change the face of an industry - and make
himself very rich in the ptocess.
There is another side to the subject of ideas in commerce. Stealing them.
Or to put it more pleasantly, emulating them. The error of failing to  
emulate
a winning idea pervades every industry at all levels. Mainly this is due either
to indolence or to folly. Of indolence, no more need be said. The folly, on
the other hand, often takes the shape of a peculiar affliction, known collo-
quially as the 'it wasn't invented here' syndrome. I would place this affliction
very high on the list of reasons preventing individuals and companies from
achieving major success.
Why people should be loath to emulate success is a matter for psycholo-
gists. The fact that they do is a matter of fact. The result of such ostrich-like
behaviour can be catastrophic. As I discovered to my cost.
Dennis Publishing had been involved in magazines featuring computer and
electronic games from their beginnings in the 1980s. We had competitors, of
course, but we were certainly a big part of the UK market. What we didn't
know was that we were about to take a massive pasting from a smallish rival.
Enter Chris Anderson, who founded Future Publishing. Chris had two
great ideas, which he executed perfectly. Firstly, he was prepared to pay thelikes of Sony a king's ransom to secure the publishing rights to magazines
such as The Official Sony Playstation Magazine. Secondly, he put his maga-
zines in a bag and also popped into the bag a playable electronic game.
All this meant that Future's magazines were more expensive to produce
than their competitors and more expensive on the newsstand. It also meant
that Future Publishing did not own such magazines themselves. The intel-
lectual property rights were licensed from the hardware manufacturers. In
the end, The Official Sony Playstation Magazine did not belong to Chris. He
was just the publisher.
The thought of publishing a magazine I did not own was offputting to
me. Nor was I that keen on handing over millions of dollars in advance to
huge companies like Sony or Sega. Thus Dennis Publishing stuck to produc-
ing 'unofficial' magazines in the games market. Sounds smart, right?
Our costs were less, although we were forced to scrabble around
constantly, attempting to locate second-rate games to include in our bagged
issues. Future's games were top of the line, because they were 'official'. (By
now, most readers had come to expect a 'free' game with every electronic
games magazine they bought.)
The result was predictable. Future Publishing wiped the floor with
Dennis Publishing in the computer and electronic games magazine market.
Readers didn't care about the magazine. They cared about the free game in
the bag. Manufacturers of games were reluctant to allow us to buy their
games to put in our bags, because we published only 'unofficial' titles. In
essence, the market was a monopoly and Dennis Publishing had backed the
pirates and lost.
In the end, we sold those few Dennis Publishing games magazines that
we had not already folded to Future at 'fire-sale' prices, (Well, maybe not
fire-sale prices, but nothing like as much as I would have wished to receive!)
They had pasted us; and we deserved to be pasted.
And yet, this process took years. Year after year, we plugged away
attempting the impossible. We invested heavily on the internet and  
produced
a successful games portal - which we also sold to Future. The Dennis inter-
net games portal was more successful than our magazines. Why? For the
simple reason that we were not fighting with one hand tied behind our back,
as we were on the newsstands with the 'official' versus 'non-official' brand-
ing. On the internet, at least, we were not perceived as 'pirates'.It wasn't that Dennis wouldn't fight, or that we lost heart. But we were
not prepared to emulate Future and invest the money to acquire 'official'
licences ourselves. Even when we did try with a later games platform,
Microsoft's X-Box, our rivals were smart enough to pay way above the odds
to shut us out of the market.
Future's template was there. Their success was obvious. Dennis had the
financial resources, or could have borrowed them at a pinch. But we hated
to admit that we w'ere wrong, and by the time we had come to grips with
our idiocy, Future had signed up virtually all the 'official' games magazine
publishing rights that mattered. Even today, I shudder at the thought of the
wasted blood, sweat and treasure we expended on our games magazines.
Dennis Publishing failed in the electronic games market because we
would not (and later, could not) emulate a winning idea. My managers
argued, both at the time and in hindsight, that the licences themselves were
immensely difficult to obtain and that Sony's dominance precluded successonce Future had obtained it. All this may be true, but why then did we
continue battling what amounted to a monopoly for so long in the same old
way? The answer is that we found it repugnant to admit that Future had hit
upon the right idea and that we had refused to emulate it.
What I should have done was to have taken my best men and women in
the company and send them to Japan, Europe or America. Or anywhere
where Sega, Sony and Microsoft and the rest would agree to meet with us. We
should have wined, dined and cosied up to them. We should have searched
for another vehicle via which the popularity of such games could be  
exploited.
If no other vehicle could be found, we should have tried trumping
Future's offers worldwide. Cash is a great persuader. If this wouldn't fly, we
should have exited the market. We did none of these things, in any meaning-
ful way, and we paid the price. We were pasted because we refused to  
emulate.
On a less painful note, let's take a look at what happens when you are
prepared to emulate an idea and execute it brilliantly. In May 1994, Britain's
largest magazine publishing company, IPC, launched a magazine for young
men called Loaded. This was the brainchild of its editor, Jarnes Brown. How
Brown had persuaded the 'suits' at IPC to permit this stroke of genius
remains a mystery, although I can personally testify to James's powers of
charm and persuasion in a clinch,
Loaded was the first of the so-called 'lad' magazines and its success created
a new genre, simultaneously threatening old-guard titles like E squire and GQ
while racking up colossal newsstand sales. Loaded was a breath of fresh air  
in
the men's magazine market: irreverent, funny, subversive and addictive.
James's timing was impeccable. This was the ink-on-paper version of the  
BBC
sitcom Men Behaving Badly or the sports quiz They Think It's All Over. Every
other consumer magazine publisher in England was consumed with envy.
IPC's deadly rival, EMAP, immediately set about revamping a tiny men's
fashion title they had acquired called FHM (For Him Monthly), possibly the
worst-named magazine in history. But names don't count, as pop groups like
The Rolling Stones or the Beatles demonstrate.
FHM became a copy of Loaded, with a twist of its own. It avoided
madcap elements, for which the latter was infamous, and had a slightly  
sexier,more sophisticated image. Right from the start, FHM courted advertisers as
hard as they courted readers. EMAP correctly identified that the top brass at
IPC were somewhat embarrassed by Loaded's brash tone, and had conse-
quently skimped on the title's advertising sales and marketing resources.
In addition, FHM forged links with tabloid newspapers like the Sun,
providing them with exclusive use of their photo-shoots of female celebrities
in bikinis in exchange for publicity. Within a very short time, FHM had
established an unassailable lead in the British 'lads' publishing market, a lead
which neither Loaded nor Maxim (Dennis Publishing's launch in 1995) has
ever been able to assail.
The success of FHM in the UK demonstrates the power of emulation,
especially when executed with verve and confidence. I am told that the
British edition of FHM put £12 million on the bottom line the year before
last. EMAP deserves it. (Of course, that wasn't quite the case in the Maxim
vs FHM battles abroad - but that's a story for another day.)
The lesson is clear. Despite the words of the old rock 'n' roll song, the
original is not the greatest. Not always. If you want to be rich, then watch
your rivals closely and never be ashamed to emulate a winning strategy.  
They
may josh you a little for doing it, but that's a price well worth paying.
The problem with the great idea is that it concentrates the mind on the
idea itself. This is fine as far as it goes. But unless the idea is executed effi-
ciently and with panache and originality, then it doesn't matter how great
the idea is, the enterprise will fail. Ideas are certainly of immense impor-
tance, but I have seen so many people attempting to create a start-up
company who have become obsessed with proving that their idea was 'right'
rather than obsessed with making money. And I have watched them wast-
ing years doing it.
Nobody really cares if an idea is 'right', except the person who came up
with it. Apple (on whose computer I am typing these words) is a case in
point. Begun by two 'nerds' in a garage, Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak,
Apple took off with its Apple II computer more than a quarter of a century
ago and, after a difficult period with the ill-fated 'Lisa' model, hit pay dirt
with the Macintosh computer in the mid-1980s. More recently, its iPod
music storage device has transformed the consumer technology landscape.
Let me make it clear that I am a loyal customer and great fan of Apple.
I bought a Lisa back in 1983 or thereabouts. I bought the first Mac the next
year and have proceeded to buy nearly every new model since. For twentyyears, my company has also published the world's finest Macintosh  
computer
magazine, MacUser. I know the company and their products well, at least
from an historical perspective.
But Apple have a problem. They have always had a problem. His name
is Steve Jobs. Steve has been a victim of the fallacy of the great idea over  
and
over again. Back in 1984, Apple were poised to take over the world of
personal computing. All their larger rivals, including IBM, were in disarray.
They just didn't get the personal computer revolution. Jobs and Wozniak
did get it.
Apple's products were innovative, slick, cool and far, far superior in every-
way to any other personal computer available at that time. In tact, they were
so cool their users often spent a great deal of time proselytising for the  
Apple
cause. Users like me, for instance. So why is Apple such a small part of the
personal computer market today? The answer is Steve Jobs.
Steve comes up with or encourages brilliant ideas. He has the guts to
back them and to see them through. He is smart, passionate and a great man.
But he will not admit he is wrong and he would, apparendy, rather go broke
than make such an admission. It was Steve, I am told, who insisted that the
early Macintosh computers should be 'closed boxes' and that the Mac oper-
ating system would never be shared or licensed to other manufacturers.
A description used by Apple marketeers at the time was that the Mac was
like a Cuisinart - a food blender - and did not need to connect to the rest
of the world. A Mac could do for you whatever you wanted to do with a
computer. It would not compromise itself by sharing the opportunity to
communicate with lesser machines or devices.
The hardware would be Apple, the accessories would be Apple, the soft-
ware would be Apple. No open architecture. No compromise with the 'jerks'
running the big old-style computing companies who were flexing their
muscles and salivating at this burgeoning new market. Steve Jobs would not
share his operating system, as IBM and others subsequently did. His attitude
towards all rivals (and I have witnessed this at first hand) was astonishingly
arrogant. I'll bet it still is.
There is a story from the early days of Apple, which I like to believe is
true, of Jobs being invited to the CEO's office of a huge rival computer
corporation. Steve parked his bum on the corner of the great man's massivedesk, leaned over and told him: 'I am going to bury you. Apple is going to
bury your company.' No he didn't. They buried him.
This arrogance, and belief that only his (or his company's) ideas are right,
is the dark side of the fire that has driven Apple up and down a financial
roller-coaster for nearly thirty years. Jobs is the saviour of the company.  
Jobs
is also a man who appears to be in thrall to what he sees in a mirror.
It is not true that there is a large sign on Steve Jobs's desk at Apple which
reads, 'My Way or the Highway' - but the fact that so many people believe
there is such a sign tells its own story. Apple's innovations and ideas (as  
well
as its corporate arrogance) are a legend in the computer industry. Those
ideas, and their eventual execution, are often world-beaters.
But an idea is not enough. It is never enough. And even its successful
execution as a piece of technology is not enough if the company refuses
to join with the rest of the world and its own customers in cooperative
exploitation.
Even Apple's iPod, a stunning technological and marketing achievement,
is designed to keep the rest of the world at bay. To get songs downloaded
onto an iPod, you have to go to the Apple music store on the internet. No
other source of music (officially) connects with an iPod. Why? Because it is
'My Way or the Highway'. It is classic Steve Jobs.
Just as he did two decades ago, I predict that Steve Jobs will take his
company to the top of the share-price mountain and then race downhill with
them under an avalanche of 'lesser' rivals and mortals who will conspire to
connect with each other and thieve Apple's customers. If it wasn't so tragic,
it would be hilarious.
The story of Apple is a morality tale, a tale of the great idea wrapped in
the passion of one man (once Steve Wozniak had departed), wrapped in a
ball of arrogance, wrapped again in a shell of marketing genius. It's great
theatre. It makes for wonderful stories in financial newspapers and technol-
ogy websites. It is a joy to behold for those who know the historical context.
But it is nor smart business, except in the short term, before 'lesser' men have
caught up. And except for Steve Jobs.
Without Jobs, Apple could never have risen from obscurity to become a
world-class brand. But with Steve Jobs, Apple will always attempt to mould
the universe to fit Steve's vision of Apple, and will pay the price again andagain and again. 'Lesser' companies and men will filch their ideas, connect,
connect, connect, and beat Apple at its own game.
Steve Jobs is not a monster. He is an all-American maverick and a world-
class marketing genius. But until a man or woman as powerful as he is  
arrives
at Apple (over his dead body), who is determined to break the cycle he has
indulged in for so many years, Apple will remain merely an icon of awe. It
will not become a company of the size that truly could (and should) 'bury'
monsters like IBM.
So if I believe all this, why do I use Apple computers? I use them because
they are better computers. Far better than any other personal computer  
avail-
able on the planet. And because I was in at the beginning and still feel in
myself the incredible excitement that Wozniak and Jobs stirred in what they
called 'the rest of us'. I am still one of 'the rest of us' and will remain loyal
to Apple products. In my heart of hearts, too, I wish Steve Jobs and Steve
Wozniak had buried their corporate rivals. But then, I was always a sucker  
for
the underdog.
As for Mr Jobs himself, you should understand that the 'character flaws'
I have harped on about in the preceding paragraphs, if flaws they are, have
made him an insanely rich man. Far, far richer than I could ever hope to be.
His Pixar film animation company has been extraordinarily successful and has
now been purchased for nearly $7 billion, yes seven billion dollars, by 
Disney.
Steve is the majority shareholder in Pixar. He has now become the
biggest stockholder in Walt Disney's old media monster. Not bad for a guy
with 'character flaws' who started in a garage, eh! Let us hope he helps revive
the fortunes of that venerable old beast.
Even so, beware of the great idea. You must encourage great ideas and
search for them diligently. But either you control and develop such ideas or
the ideas will come to dominate your waking thoughts. And that would not
be such a great thing. Not unless you are Steve Jobs.
I just took a break and went down to a local bar to watch the sunset and
sink a few beers. There, I was foolish enough to mention this chapter, The
Fallacy of the Great Idea. A wise gentleman on the barstool next to me, who
has stewardship of more money than I will ever think about, reminded me
of the phrase attributed to the American philosopher and poet, Ralph WaldoEmerson:
If a man write a better book, preach a belter sermon, or make a better
mouse-trap than his neighbour, tho' he build his house in the woods, the
world will make a beaten path to bis door.
There's the power of a great idea, Felix,' he smiled.
'Not so,' I countered. The operative verb is 'make'. It is not 'think up',
or 'dream up'. It is 'make'. The idea would be worthless, no one would beat
a path to any door, unless they heard that the mouse-trap had been made.
I read that Google, the tremendously successful internet search engine in
America, encourages certain staff to spend 20 per cent of their working time
developing their own pet ideas. It will be interesting to see how this plays
out. Googie raised so much money upon its flotation on the stock market
that many Google employees became millionaires overnight. Will such
millionaires, with a Ph.D. in computer engineering, be content to make
Google even more money? Or will they strike out on their own? Will there
be lawsuits relating to exactly where a particularly successful idea was devel-
oped? It will be fascinating to see.
If you never have a single great idea in your life, but become skilled in
executing the great ideas of others, you can succeed beyond your wildest
dreams. Seek them out and make them work. They do not have to be your
ideas. Execution is all in this regard.
If, on the other hand, you spend your days thinking up and developing
in your mind this great idea or that, you are unlikely to get rich. Although
you are likely to make many others rich. That is usually the way of it.
Ideas don't make you rich. The correct execution of ideas does.
6
OBTAINING
CA PI TA L
No one would remember the Good Samaritan
if he'd only had good intentions.
He had money as well.MARGARET THATCHER
DOLPHINS, SHARKS AND FISHES
There are only six ways of obtaining capital. You can be given or inherit it;
you can steal it; you can win it; you can marry it; you can earn it; you can
borrow it.
The first four of these are beyond the compass of this book. All I will say
about 'winning it', presumably by gambling, is that the odds are very bad
indeed. It's no way to get rich.
It is true that certain people exhibit incredible ability in games of skill like
poker. But in the end, the losing streaks always seem to become longer and
the winning streaks shorter. Gambling, even for those at near genius level, is
time-consuming and totally exhausting. As for games of chance, I will not
insult your intelligence by discussing them. The Lottery is merely a pleasant
name for organised racketeering.
As to theft, leaving aside the morality of it, I do not believe the light to
be worth the candle. The downside is too high and the upside too uncertain.
Should you succeed in stealing a great deal of money, you will then spend
many years looking over your shoulder in fear of discovery. As Shakespeare
put it:
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.
Marrying into money has a nice ring to it. But rich in-laws often know very
well - very much better than your innocent spouse, in fact - why it was you
married. That's not to say it doesn't work. I knew a KGB colonel who is now
an arms dealer based on his divorce settlement. And I know a therapist who
married into an old-money pile. But I wouldn't exactly describe their road
to riches as uneventful. Apart from jealous spouses extracting their pound of
flesh, both men appear restless and are quick to take offence if they think
others are sneering at them. (Which, of course, we sometimes are).
The French socialist Pierre Proudhon had the right of it: 'Property is
theft !' he thundered. Aye, so it is. But it is legalised theft, the main pillar of
Western capitalism, a rotten and debased system of managing human  
affairs,
and yet the only system that has survived the demise of all rivals.
However we may feel about it, capitalism is the only system under which
readers of this book are likely to labour. And as its name implies, it requirescapital for those who wish to play the game and succeed.
As to the fifth method of acquiring capital - earning it - this is a long-
term game plan, although it is true that if you can demonstrate the ability to
earn money early on, it does become somewhat easier to borrow from others
successfully later.
But for the majority of rich people who started with nothing, borrowing
money in one form or another becomes a necessity sooner or later. Let's
explore the various options on the borrowing front.
Firstly, avoid sharks like the plague. Perhaps you have read stories about
people who launched a small company by taking out a dozen credit cards  
and
juggling their cash limits for a few months to obtain capital?
It makes for heroic reading, but it isn't smart. Your credit rating is
extremely precious. The interest rates on credit cards or similar instruments
are beyond the capacity of nearly any legal business to sustain, and while 
bank-
ruptcy laws have become more generous to creditors in recent years, a history
of bankruptcy will plague and hinder you when you seek to return to the  
fray.
There are other predators in the sea, too, but nearly all of them demand
punitive rates of interest. Anyone who has borne the burden of a loan that
sucks the lifeblood from you week after week, month after month, leaving
you exhausted and no further forward than when you started, will tell you
what a terrible price such borrowings exact from the human spirit. Better to
labour as a wage slave than as a beast of burden to a loan shark.
It's not all doom and gloom, though. While it may not look like it to
you, there is simply too much money in the world; too much capital seeking
too few investment opportunities.
That, at any rate, is what you'll read in the financial press from the
mouths of investment bankers, venture capitalists, mutual fund managers
and from a new breed of gunslingers on the block, hedge fund managers.
(Hedge funds, according to Fortune magazine, by the way, are mutual funds
with the 'ability to short stocks and deploy exotic financial instruments'.
Well, bully for them.)
If you wouldn't know a hedge fund from an asparagus bed, welcome
aboard. I can assure you though, based on decades of owner/manager expe-
rience in both private and public companies, that asparagus beds do have  one
thing in common with hedge funds. Manure. Tons and tons of manure. The
only people I ever met who got insanely rich from a hedge fund operation
were (you guessed it!) the managers of hedge funds.
So how come it's so difficult to locate capital if there's so much of it about?
The simple answer is that the amounts of money you probably have in
mind are way too small. And 'small' can work on many levels. In 2004 my
company did the rounds of New York City banks and institutions. We were
looking for a measly S20 million at a reasonable rate of interest spread over
five or six years for a specific purpose. No dice. We were offered $100  
million
dollars, no sweat - but only if the providers could cut themselves in for 'a
piece of the action'.
This seemed crazy to me. I had plenty of security and was merely look-
ing to borrow a little money, not lumber my company with an 'end-game
partner'. Eventually, we found what we needed, but we had to come back to
Europe to do it.
So what had happened? Many US providers of capital of any stripe now
only wish to play ball in return for 'a piece of the action' — not to mention
the guaranteed return of the capital and interest if no action materialises! (In
that sense, we were probably the victims of recent low interest rates, which
have forced traditional bankers into a game of Darwinian evolution. If inter-
est rates won't bring home the bacon, then maybe 'a piece of the action' will.
Banks, like everyone else, have to evolve or die.)
This, of course, is the premise upon which venture capitalists have always
operated. Venture capital companies are one way to raise capital, for sure.
But the price they demand is nearly always that you hand over a huge chunk
of equity. More often than not, they also insist on a date by which your new
venture must be sold, either back to yourself or to outsiders.
Why? Because their own funds usually come from wealthy individuals
who demand a high return within a limited time frame. This, in turn, leads
many venture capitalists to move from an advisory to an operational role
in any business in which they invest, cramping your style and scaring the
pants out of everyone who works for you. Those wealthy investors in their
own funds are unforgiving and merciless, and venture capitalists will there-
fore do anything it takes to protect and maximise short-term returns from
your business.They aren't so much sharks as dolphins - a nickname deriving from their
frantic desire to 'flip' every deal as quickly as possible. By 'flipping', I mean
a sale. They do not care who the venture is sold to (yourself or an outside
party), but the return of their investment, with a massive bonus for the risk
and skill they have invested, is mandatory.
Venture capital money, dolphin money, is not for the faint-hearted. Too
often, it is only for the desperate - unless building a business for a quick(ish)
return and a small piece of the action is your goal. And there is nothing
wrong with such a goal in the short term.
If that is the case, then it's worth remembering that the best of the
dolphins can certainly boast a ton of managerial talent and experience. They
tend to know what they are talking about in the abstract, if not in your
particular niche. Dolphins can afford to hire such talent for the simple reason
that they absolutely have to. Those high-wealth individuals, and institutional
investors who invested with them in the first place, are unforgiving. Your
successful venture-capital -funded business must also pay for the failures  
that
the same venture capitalist invested in last year.
In the glorious lines of Jonathan Swift:
So, naturalists observe, a flea
Hath smaller fleas that on him prey;
And these have smaller fleas to bite 'em,
And so proceed ad infinitum.
And from a later poet, Augustus de Morgan;
Great fleas have little fleas upon their backs to bite 'em,
And little fleas have lesser fleas, and so ad infinitum.
And the great fleas themselves, in turn, have greater fleas to go on;
While those again have greater still, and greater still, and so on.
Ad infinitum indeed! Ah, the wonders of capitalism! Adam Smith, you old
rogue, what have you to say now?
Time and again I have watched existing companies wishing to expand, or
new ventures anxious to get started, mire themselves with the slippery
dolphins. A few of them succeed, and succeed gloriously, it has to be said.
But a great many other original owners or creators are squeezed out longbefore the fabled 'big pay day'.
If you tail to grow your businesses swiftly enough, then flipper becomes
agitated and noses in. His very survival (or at least his annual bonus) depends
upon your performance that year. Flipper doesn't care about long-term
prospects. He doesn't even care about long-term shareholder value. He only
cares about growth - and he cares about it now.
As with his co-denizen of the deep, the shark, he either keeps moving
forward or he drowns - and you have no choice but to move forward or
drown with him. Except it will not be his corpse spiralling down into the
depths if things go wrong. He will live to fight another day. You, on the
other hand, will be shark bait.
Venture capitalist short-termism, with its eye firmly glued to the sale of
an enterprise within three or four years, is the hallmark of nearly all venture
capital activity. As is their insistence on a massive stake, often a controlling
one, in any business they provide capital for. Experience has shown them  
rhat
this control, combined with financial growth at almost any price, is the
course most likely to return the profits they need to satisfy their own
investors: the great fleas on their back.
Believe me, they are hard taskmasters. But they may be the only way tor
you to get really started. More often, you will start up underfunded, on your
own or with the fishes (we are coming to that), and only turn to the dolphins
for the injection of capital you believe will propel you to the next level. That  
is
usually the way of it. You will need a degree of success to exhibit to them. 
And
you will need to be somewhat humble - except in your financial projections.
I have been approached by venture capitalists on many occasions. They
are not evil men and women; far from it. They are mostly smart, well-
connected, persuasive and passionate about success. But their first loyalty is
to the quick buck. You do business with them at your peril. Be warned: with
them, you may have a better than even chance of making your first million.
But you will make them many, many more millions in order to do so. And
you are unlikely to stay in control of your own destiny with any business they
invest heavily in.
Should you decide to approach venture capitalists, and by some miracle
should they agree to back you, then I urge you to seek the finest legal advice
that your money can buy for the ensuing negotiations. Just one sentence,even a phrase, within the initial contract can make all the difference in the
world to the outcome a few years down the road.
The dolphins are consummate professionals - to them you are just
another amateur in the sea trying to stay afloat, to grow, to make his or her
financial dreams come true. Amateurs are easy meat. (Real-life dolphins, by
the way, are not the gentle creatures children believe them to be. They can  
be
dangerous and their beaks are as hard as bone. They can, and do, batter  
sharks
to death in massed attacks if they have to. And their appetite is prodigious.)
Having avoided the sharks and perhaps swum with the dolphins, we turn
to the fishes. How I love the fishes! How you will learn to love them, too!
It was via the fishes that I made my own first money - the seed capital
which ensured that I retained control and ownership of my own business
back in the early days of Dennis Publishing. Fishes come in all shapes and
sizes. Friends, acquaintances, relatives, business colleagues, small investors,
friendly bank managers of the old school, professional advisors, ex-employ-
ers, suppliers and vendors are among them. But how can they be of any use?
Let me illustrate by my own example. In 1972 I persuaded a jolly young
lawyer I had met to act for me. His name was Bernie Simons. I had no money
to pay him, but perhaps my chutzpah amused him. He helped me to register
my £100 limited-liability company and provided me with at least a figleaf of
respectability. I think I paid him £20 for his services. The company was called
H. Bunch Associates and I intended to publish a series of comic books.
Next, I persuaded a close friend, Dick Fountain, to join me as co-director
and production manager. There wasn't much in the way of a salary on offer,
but Dick came all the same. We 'liberated' a few sticks of office furniture, two
electric typewriters and a floor camera from the offices of OZ magazine
(where Dick and I had met), which was then in the process of winding up.
Another friend, Lemmy, later to become famous with the heavy-metal
band Motorhead, mentioned that an acquaintance of his was vacating a
garret in the West End - perhaps we could move in there? (Lemmy used
occasionally to sleep under the OZ design table while recovering from exces-
sive ingestion of alcohol and other substances.)
Lemmy was right about the empty flat. Three rooms at the top of the
most rickety stairs I had ever climbed. The building had been badly damaged
in the Blitz and never properly rebuilt. The last tenants had been breedingpuppies there in straw pens. It took a long time to get rid of the stink of
puppy shit.
The place was a total dump, but at least we had an 'office'. I reluctantly
sold one of the electric typewriters and produced a deposit for the landlord.  
He
was anxious only that we should never mention we were using the garret as an
'office'. The local council had designated it as a 'residence'. A 'residence' with
no kitchen, no bathroom and no ceiling. In one room you could look straight
through the rafters into the gaps between the roof tiles and see the sky.
Next, a close friend and colleague, Richard Adams, designed some smart
headed notepaper for us free of charge, suspecting (rightly) that we might be
able to provide him with work if our venture succeeded. A small printer I had
come to know while working for OZ magazine agreed to print this note-
paper, knowing full well I could not pay him for it right then.
A semi-friendly, amused bank manager at Barclays Bank in Tottenham
Court Road opened an account for the company, into which I deposited the
mighty sum of £50. A magazine distributor, Moore-Harness, with whom OZ
had done business, agreed to distribute my product, although I had nothing
to show them. All we needed now was content for our comic, and a printer
to print it.
The content was not a problem. We knew plenty of comic illustrators and
they would not expect to be paid in advance. Indeed, some of them would
not expect to be paid at all, and were surprised when we eventually managed
to do so. The printing was the big stumbling block, of course. Somehow, I
had to persuade a printer to provide machine time and paper to produce the
comic we were busy preparing in the garret. The bill would come to a few
thousand pounds.
I had written a great many record reviews when I worked for OZ maga-
zine. The record companies would send albums directly to my flat in the
hope of soliciting a review and they never asked for the LPs back. I sorted
out all the albums I could bear to part with and sold them to a local record
shop. This brought in just sufficient funds to at least get a few printers to talk
to me while Dick and I lived on £10 a week. But unless I could guarantee
that the printers got paid, not one of them, very sensibly, would budge.
Then I had an idea. I asked Brian Moore and Charlie Harness, the
owners of my potential distributors for the comic, to write to a particular
printer, promising that he would be the first to receive money from Moore-
Harness when the comic came out, Brian and Charlie did not guarantee themoney; they were not exactly idiots. But they made it sound, as a matter of
common sense, that at least enough money was likely to be generated by
sales of the comic to pay the print and paper bill.
And they stressed that their client, my little company, would only receive
any residue when and if the printer had been paid in full. This was the key.
Brian and Charlie turned out to be the most effective fishes in the pond of
my ambition.
Business must have been slow, because the printer agreed to Moore-
Harness's proposal. I secretly suspect that he did so as much to keep me from
constantly badgering him as anything else. Persistence is a powerful tool in
the hands of a hungry young hustler on the make. And he probably did not
wish to offend a powerful distributor like Moore-Harness. Distributors
sometimes have a say in who gets to print what.
Thus it was that the first issue of Cozmic Comics was unleashed upon
an unsuspecting world. It barely made a cent, but it provided the frame-
work for yet more publishing ventures. Within two years I had sixty thou-
sand pounds in the bank. (That is the equivalent of half a million pounds
today.) The printers were paid. The contributors were paid. The designers
were paid. The landlord was paid. Bernie Simons got paid. Even Dick and
I were paid.
Above all, I retained control of the company. A company I still own 1OO
per cent of thirty years later, I had created capital by swimming with the  
fishes.
Without Dick's expertise, or the kindness of a lawyer, or the trust of
contributors and designers, or the amused tolerance of my distributors, or
any of a hundred other encouragements from those around me, it simply
could not have been done. I have read, in articles written about me since in
newspapers and magazines, that fierce loyalty to old friends and colleagues is
my best characteristic. I believe that to be so. But having read all of the
above, can anyone wonder why?
Some will argue that what I did back in 1972 could not be emulated today.
But human nature does not change and, at bottom, we are cooperative
animals. Many people are indulgent towards the young - after all, we were all
once young ourselves. Those who wish to start a company and get rich  
cannot
expect a free ride. But they might be surprised at the number of fishes in their
particular pond willing to help them to some degree or another.And look at the consequences in my own case:
O Moore-Harness continued to distribute my magazines. When Brian and
Charlie were forced to sell their company years later, I fought hard to
ensure fair treatment for its two founders. By that time, I was in a posi-
tion to return their original favour.
O Dick Fountain is still a director of Dennis Publishing and the company
has put food on his table for more than thirty years.
O Our landlord was happy to sell me the building in which our garret was
located decades later when he retired.
O The printer went on printing for us until the day he sold up. As far as
Dick and I were concerned, we owed him.
O I continued to bank with Barclays for far longer than I should have done,
solely from a sense of misplaced loyalty.
O Richard Adams still designs projects for me.
O And guess what? My legal advisors in the UK today are a firm named
Simons, Muirhead & Burton, founded by none other than one Bernie
Simons, a young lawyer who helped a kid on the make register his first
company.
O Lastly, to this day, I always do my best to encourage, or to be of some
practical help, to others who wish to strike out on their own.
Venture capitalists, major investors and bankers all have their part to play in
providing capital for individuals and start-up companies. But if it is at all
possible, give me the fish over the sharks and dolphins every time. It may
take a mite longer to get there, but you'll be far richer, or at the very least,
happier, in the long run.
One last word on obtaining capital. It's the worst part of the whole busi-
ness of getting rich. Nothing is more humiliating or debilitating than trudg-
ing the rounds with your hand out, no matter how good your project or
fierce your determination. Everyone has to do it and everyone hates it. For
a self-made man or woman there is no avoiding it. Beware of anyone who
tells you that there are short cuts to obtaining even a small amount of capi-
tal. Outside of family and friends, there are none that I ever heard of.
Look on the bright side. Those lazy bastards who turn away from this
odious task are going to be your employees. They are going to make you  
rich.In a sense, this exhausting and miserable search is what separates the
wannabes from the gonnabes. The only way through it is to keep trudging.
'When going through, hell,' Winston Churchill once remarked, 'keep going.'
If you cannot bear the thought of prostrating yourself to obtain the seed
corn, then you will almost certainly never own the farm. 'To get what you
need / You toady to greed.'
Or else, you ask; very, very nicely indeed.
7
A great calm moon rose back o' the mill,
And I told myself it was God's will
Who went hungry and who went fed.
I tried to whistle; I tried to be brave;
But the new ploughed fields smelt dank as the grave
And I wished I were dead.
 NEVER GIVE IN
Never give in! Never give in! Never, never,
never, never - in nothing great or small., large
or petty. Never give in., except to convictions
of honour and good sense.
WINSTON CHURCHILL
HANDSTANDS ON THE RIM OF HELL
Some years ago, I bought up part of the library of the novelist J.B. Priestley,
In one of his books, Up Hill and Down Dale, by a virtually unknown poet,
Kenneth H. Ashley, published in 1924, I found a slip of paper where
Priestley had marked a particular poem:
Out of Work
Alone at the shut of the day was I,
With a star or two in a frost cleared sky,
And the byre smell in the air.
I'd tramped the length and breadth o' the fen;
But never a farmer wanted men;
Naught doing anywhere.
I know that feeling, and if you are set on creating your own business from
scratch, then so will you. Despite all my brave words earlier in the previous
chapter, I never knew a worse few months than when I was bashing my head
against a brick wall attempting to start my own outfit in the early 1970s. The
whole process was pure misery.
Looking back through the prismed eyes of a champagne flute, I suppose
I could argue that perhaps it was my finest moment. Not that it felt like it at
the time. To be honest, it nearly broke me.
But I would not give in.
That was the secret ingredient. I would not be a wage slave, I would not
take 'no' for an answer. I would not give in. I was going to be rich. Some
how. Some way. Some day soon. And I would not retreat to the safety of a
decent job until I was starved out of house and home.I would not give in.
Not that I cared, to be honest I barely noticed, but Britain appeared to
be in terminal financial decline at the time. Interest rates had sky-rocketed
and strikes were so commonplace it was difficult to recall a landscape not
riven by demonstrations, lockouts and industrial disputes. The banks and the
markets weren't just skittish, they were downright terrified. Property values
either soared or collapsed. Politicians were jittery. IRA bombs were explod-
ing left, right and centre. The UK had been railroaded into what was then
the European Community. They were not good times.
No one appeared very interested in loaning money to an unemployed,
long-haired south London lad who called himself a publisher. And frankly,
who could blame them?
What fuelled me was the desperation of knowing that unless I found a
way round my lack of capital, unless I could pour my energy into a venture
of my own, I would be condemned to a life of wage slavery. There is
absolutely nothing more likely to dampen the prospects of becoming rich
than a nice, fat, regular salary cheque.
Many of my friends were in the same boat, and not a few of them were
better educated and smarter than I was. The cleverest of them had chosen
careers in advertising agencies or with record companies or in television
or radio.
It was depressing meeting with them, listening to stories of their latest
promotion, never able to buy a round in the pub as they were so generously
willing and able to do. Month after month I soldiered on, while 'the new
ploughed fields smelt dank as the grave; and I wished I were dead'.
But I would not give in.
I had had offers. One or two of them decent offers. There were people who
believed I could make them money. And I could have done. It was tempting.
My years working at OZ magazine had served as a fine apprenticeship (an
apprenticeship I shall always be grateful for) and, as a result, I had met many
people in the arts, the media and in politics. In addition, the owner of OZ,
Richard Neville, had once asked me to spend a few weeks at a poster  
company
with the bizarre name of ECAL, which stood for Effective Communications
Arts Limited. ECAL owed OZ money for advertising. Rather a lot of  
money.
It was my job to get it back.I had arrived at ECAL's Covent Garden offices one fine summer morn-
ing. It was a shambles. They had a fantastic stock of posters in the basement,
but there were far too many layabouts on the payroll and precious little in
the way of organisation or sales and accounts staff. I astonished those pres-
ent by firing one or two people.
This was unspeakable. Hippies did not 'fire' each other. I was hauled in
front of one of the directors, Bill Butler. What nobody knew was that Barry
Miles and Bill Butler, two of the founders of ECAL, had already agreed to
me running their ship for a while. They were growing as tired of unpaid  
bills
as their customers and vendors were. The firings stood.
I was ostracised. Which worried me not a whit. For a few weeks I hurled
myself into the business. I was abrupt, obnoxious, full of myself and spec-
tacularly successful. When I discovered a particular poster was selling like  
hot
cakes (Frank Zappa sitting on the loo), I ordered more. We would have to
wait, I was told. The printer was busy. So I printed it on crappy paper at
another printer. Who cared? They still sold.
More horror from staffers. ECAL was an art business, I was primly
informed. No it wasn't. It was a basement with a lot of idle tossers in it
scrounging a living.
The net result of my work in the basement at Covent Garden was that
OZ got repaid and ECAL became more profitable. For a while, anyway.  
But
they soon slipped back into their comfortable ways and shut up shop.
So I knew I could run a business. I knew I could turn one around, if I
had to. What I didn't know was how the hell I was going to find the
money to get started. In fact all I knew was - you guessed it - I would not
give in.
I remember a bitter winter night in my West End flat at the back of a
Savile Row sweat shop. Edward Heath's three-day week was in operation,  
or
at least a precursor to it, and some daft minister had suggested that the citi-
zens of the UK should learn 'to shave in the dark' to save electricity. That
was nothing new to me. The electricity had been turned off in my flat weeks
ago. So had the gas. I couldn't afford to pay the bill.
I sat by an open fire, feeding broken furniture I had scavenged from askip into my living-room fireplace, watching scorched veneer bubble and
peel from the sawn-off leg of a chair. My girlfriend sat beside me on a
battered old beanbag. The food we had just cooked had been bought by her.
So had the cigarettes we were smoking. She worked in a boutique round the
corner in Carnaby Street.
Softly, cautiously, insistently, she set out to persuade me to take the job
I had been offered as a result of yet another attempt to raise money. She
reminded me that at twenty-five years old, I was still a young man. That I
could always give up the job and then start my own company later. That this
was not the time. That she hated to see me so bad tempered, doing little but
making plans and spinning wheels in a hopeless quest to raise capital to start
my own business.
I nearly cracked. I loved her as only the young can love, and I knew I
would lose her if I refused. Not that she ever said as much, she wasn't a
greedy or a cruel lass, but even so, I knew. Perhaps she was right. Maybe I
should take the job and try to launch my own company in a year or so's time.
Why not, if it would make her happy? It was only a job, after all. Not like
joining the army - I could always leave in a few weeks - or months - or  
years.
If I had promised her then, sitting by that fire, promised that I would
'earn a crust like a normal human being', then my life would have taken a
different course, I think. Yet, like the poet Robert Frost: 'Knowing how way
leads on to way / I doubted that I should ever come back.' There was the
rub. It was now or it was never.
How close did I come? Did I open my mouth to speak? Memory plays
tricks when you're older, and I cannot be sure. I am sure of one thing,
though. That promise never came out of my mouth.
I did not give in.
Then the phone rang. (I would have walked naked in the street before I
allowed them to cut off my phone.) It was a pal of mine; somebody I was
later to employ for many years. He had some good news.
He had bought a second-hand car with his salary from his advertising
sales job and was parked downstairs by the telephone box. I let him up and
he produced some bottles of beer and a spliff. He drove my girlfriend home
later. You can guess the rest. Money talks. Bullshit walks.
The next day, I went straight back to knocking on doors and punishing
the phone, pestering people for capital. Learning how to swim with thefishes. No way was I going to spend my life making other people rich. No
way was I going to become a token hippy in some record company. No way
was I going to do any damn thing except get on the merry-go-round of
making dosh. Real dosh. My dosh.
I would not give in.
That is what it is like in the beginning. Always. It is desperate and it is
humiliating. As you will find, in your own way, unless you were born with a
rich mummy or daddy or uncle. For the rest of us, if you want to be rich,
then you must walk a narrow, lonely road to get the capital to make it so.
Off in the wings, there are always the gentle, siren voices of friends,
parents and employers, of reasonable and sensible people, torn between
concern for your welfare and the secret fear that you might succeed. A harsh
reading of such concerns, I admit. But a true one.
If you happen to read biographies, as I do (scores of them every year),
you will find a thread that runs through almost any story of success against
the odds. Whether money comes into it or not. Whether the person
succeeded or failed. Or even, most sadly of all, when they did succeed, but
did not live long enough to learn of their success.
In one of the finest such books in the world. Letters to My Brother by the
artist Vincent van Gogh, collected and published long after his death, you
will find unbearable heartbreak, madness, rejection, hunger, passion, night-
mare terrors and a tale of a man who never gave in. Who would not give in,
though it cost him his life.
Van Gogh's obsessions and talents drove him mad. And he knew it. They
goaded and scourged him. He said himself that he had given his life and half
his sanity to his art. There was only one shining star of kindliness in his
universe. His brother, Theo.
Theo, despite the sensible entreaties of his sensible wife (who could
scarcely abide, let alone understand, her husband's wastrel brother), kept
sending what little he could afford for Vincent to purchase brushes, canvas
and paint. These acts of charity, which Theo could not easily afford and
which grieved Vincent to receive, changed the course of the history of art.
Because Vincent often had no money. None at all. He would sell his
paintings to peasants or inn-keepers in exchange for food and board.
Canvases that would later sell for tens of millions of dollars were exchanged
for a roof in a barn and a breakfast or lunch. (I wonder if any of those
canvases are still lying, undiscovered, in a dusty old Dutch attic?)His clothes were worn out. He wandered the countryside like a tramp.
He knew himself to be a disappointment to his family and to those few
friends who remembered his existence. He had been a disappointment to the
only woman he ever lived with. He was certainly a disappointment to
himself. Nothing went right, except, very occasionally, a particular painting.
Above all, it grieved him to be a burden to his brother.
But he would not give in.
He would die first. He would kill himself first. And that's what he did.
To our eternal shame, he did just that. And he died having written: 'I cannot
help it that my pictures do not sell. Nevertheless, the time will come when
people will see that they are worth more than the price of the paint.'
Aye, they were, Vincent. They were worth more than that,
Go buy yourself a copy of Vincent's letters. If his paintings had been
judged to be daubs fit only to kindle a fire, his letters would still shine like
diamonds in the mud of everyday life. Go buy a copy, and when the going
gets rough, my friend, or appears to be rough to you at the time, think of
Vincent van Gogh, tramping his way across a nightmare landscape of destitu-
tion and rejection for what he believed in. A man who believed he had  
failed.
But a man who never gave in.
You must choose. Life is comfortable enough in the Western world for
most people. In most parts of Europe there are the safety nets of the social
services and of government-subsidised medical care. There are decent jobs at
decent salaries with decent colleagues and a decent retirement; and all with-
out the heart-stopping fear of bankruptcy, of years of risk amid fears of igno-
minious failure.
Why make handstands on the rim of hell? Why bother to punish yourself
in such a way? Nobody else does it - why should you? Go on, make every-
one around you happy.
Why not give in?
If you are merely a wannabe, then the siren voices will prevail, and they
will be right to prevail. If you are a gonnabe, then they will not prevail. Like
Odysseus you will stop your ears with wax or bind yourself to the mast. You
will learn to walk your narrow, lonely road - and to hell with the siren voices.
You will not give in.And you will be rich.
8
THE FIVE
MOST COMMON
S T A R T- U P  E R R O R S
The history of all human ideas is a history of
irresponsible dreams, of obstinacy, and of error.
SIR. KARL POPPER, CONJECTURES  AND REFUTATIONS
THE FIRST ERROR:
MISTAKING DESIRE FOR COMPULSION
All error springs from flawed assumptions. If there are no assumptions, there
can be no error.
I am told that during the Vietnam War, a sign was kept nailed on a wall
above a particular marine commander's desk which said: 'Assumption is the
mother of all f***-ups'. Those seven words should be carved into the heart
of every entrepreneur, the wealthy or the annabe, the gonnabe or the been-
there-done-that. A shame they weren't nailed above the desk of the president
of the United States at the time.
As far as getting rich is concerned, the cardinal error is to begin such a
quest in the vague belief that you would like to be rich. Wishing or desiring
to be rich is perhaps the most commonplace of human desires, other than
sexual fantasy. Yet few people ever succeed in achieving it.
Such desire is a fleeting thing, a will-of-the-wisp floating across the
surface of the mind as you pass the front window of a chic boutique: 'I wish
I was rich. If only I could afford it, I would march straight inside and buy
that beautiful handbag.' Then the No. 43 bus comes along, and all such
thoughts arc abandoned on the pavement.
Wishes are fishes that swim in the nets
Of castaways' souls by the shores of the dead.
Where coins are as rare as a ferryman's debts,
And nobody cares what you did, or you said.
Wishes come skipping and eager to playIn the ravenous dreams of childless wives;
Wishes are thoroughbreds feasting on hay
While rickety mendicants limp all their lives.
Wishing for or desiring something is futile without an inner compulsion to
achieve it. Such lack of compulsion, if not frankly acknowledged, can lead to
great personal unhappiness. We have all met deeply unhappy souls muddling
along in professions or careers for which they are patently unsuited.
Worse still, by continually wishing and never delivering, you risk denting
your confidence, beginning a vicious downward spiral that appears to draw
misfortune like a magnet. The assumption that you might be able to achieve
some goal if you only wish hard enough is not just a f***-up. It's a poten-
tial personal tragedy.
Life is not some kind of rehearsal. Why, then, do so many people punish
themselves in this way? The answer, in almost every case, is that they were
'persuaded' or hectored into becoming a banker or a lawyer when, in reality,
they would have preferred to do something else entirely. Their misery is
made all the worse by the realisation that had they acknowledged their lack
of enthusiasm early on and stuck to their guns, their lives might well have
taken a far more congenial course.
It is my hope that this book will cause you to consider very carefully
whether you are truly driven by inner demons to be rich. If you are not, then
my earnest and heartfelt advice to you is: do not on any account make the
attempt. What are riches anyway, compared to health or the peace of mind
that even a modicum of contentment brings in its wake? In and of itself,
great wealth very rarely, if ever, breeds contentment.
Believe me, I know. I am both an entrepreneur and a poet. Perhaps it is
the poet typing these words now and not the entrepreneur. But no conde-
scension is intended whatever when I ask you to quietly turn over in your
mind whether or not you are fit to be rich. Whether the sacrifices involved -
not only your own, but those you will ask of your family, present or future —
are worth the tyranny that such ambition, by its very nature, exacts.
Never yet have I met a self-made rich man or woman whose family or
personal relationships were not plagued by the burden of creating a fortune,
even a small fortune. A rocky marriage; lack of time spent with their  
children;
the substitution of expensive gifts to repress guilt created by their frequent
absences from home; the concern that their children have grown used toprivilege and are consequently slacking in their education or lacking in ambi-
tion - all of these come as part and parcel of self-made wealth.
There is no escape, although each of us believes we can be the exception
that proves the rule. Is this a price you are prepared to pay?
And there is worse yet. Such an attempt, without the conviction to
sustain it, can bring the worst of all worlds, for if a person does achieve
wealth, at great personal sacrifice, they will have at least acquired a vast
fortune in assets or in cash. But to make the attempt without sufficient
passion and commitment, knowing in your heart of hearts that you lack the
conviction to succeed, risks the suffering of a self-inflicted plague without
even the consolations the loot may bring.
Do not mistake desire for compulsion. Only you can know the song of
your inner demons. Only yon can know if you are willing to tread the
narrow, lonely road to riches. No one else can know. No one else can tell  
you
either to do it or to refrain from the attempt. When the going gets tough,
when all seems lost, when partners and luck desert you, when bankruptcy
and failure are staring you in the face, all that can sustain you is a fierce
compulsion to succeed at any price.
Somewhere in the invisible heart of all self-made wealthy men and
women is a sliver of razored ice. The love of another, or of family (or of  
their
God, if they have one), can help to contain it. Seeking great wealth will
release that sliver to grow. It is in the nature of the beast. If you do not wish
it to grow, then quit any dreams of becoming wealthy now.
This all sounds rather melodramatic. But then I have an advantage. Not
only have I grown that sliver myself, to kill my enemies with, to slay  
demons
in the night and to harden myself against the losses to others my victories
have engendered - not only that - but I have watched it grow in others who
became wealthy. It is always there and will swell into a protective carapace as
you search to grow rich.
'Better to have tried and failed than not to have tried at all,' drones the
old saw. But in this instance, the cliche is wrong, utterly wrong.
Better to have chosen a different life, a quite different path, than have
placed yourself and those you love in harm's way when early reflection and
thought could have advised you differently. I repeat: do not mistake desirefor compulsion. Those that do nearly always fail, at great cost to themselves
and those around them.
THE SECOND ERROR:
OVEROPTIMISM CONCERNING CASH FLOW
Any trained accountant or auditor reading this book has just nodded their
head. The last four words of the subheading above are the source of the vast
majority of business failures. But why should they concern somebody who is
determined to get rich? Isn't cash flow a bean-counter topic? The concern of
accountants?
The answer is that not only does lack of cash. How eventually doom any
enterprise, it just as surely prises control of any entity from its owner or
majority shareholder. And it is control and ownership of a business entity
which brings with it the promise of future wealth.
Lose control of a business by running out of cash and you are relegated to
the status of minority investor or salaried employee. Once you lose control  
of
a business, then no bank, white knight, investor or new owner is likely to 
permit
you to gain control again, if for no other reason than that of your original sin,
your overoptimism concerning the venture's cash flow in the first place.
All new ventures (and established ones, too, come to that) require posi-
tive cash flow if they are to grow and to succeed. This is an elementary  
point,
which would scarcely need reiterating if it were not for the number of times
I have seen a promising venture snatched away from its founder when cash
Sow faltered.
Cash is a serious matter. Its management is utterly vital in any enterprise.
If, like me, you have no head for figures whatever, then this is no cause for
concern. You simply employ somebody who does and listen to them care-
fully. Lord knows, there are enough qualified bean-counters in the world and
forecasting cash flow is hardly rocket science.
It was only when a venture I was involved in became a publicly listed
company that I bothered to ask a senior accountant to explain to me what a
balance sheet really was. He was astonished. How could I have become a 
multi-
millionaire many times over without truly understanding a balance sheet?
In point of fact, he did not believe it possible at first. I explained to himthat I had always left all that stuff to my finance directors and accountants -
I was too busy making (and spending!) money, and had always begrudged
the time it might take to grasp the finer points of formally recording its
movement or current resting place.
Today, I have at least a rudimentary understanding of depreciation and
suchlike on a balance sheet. But as far as cash flow is concerned, I have little
to learn from any qualified accountant. Cash flow is something that any
entrepreneur must fully comprehend from the get-go. Balance sheets are a
matter for accountants, banks and auditors. But cash flow is the heartbeat of
your company.
If cash flow is good, then no matter how badly run or poorly managed
a company is, there is always a decent chance of turning its fortunes around.
At the very least, there is time enough to be able to do so. But if a busi-
ness's cash flow is weak or failing, then the chances are that it must shut
down or be sold in the not-too-distant future and its assets disposed of to
satisfy creditors.
Why is it that cash flow is so often the cause of business failure? Most
often, either the business is not a viable one, or it has expanded beyond its
capacity to support its rate of expansion.
Undercapitalisation is a frequent culprit. So is the 'ostrich syndrome',
where inexperienced managers or owners focus only on new business  
coming
in the door while neglecting to attend to mundane tasks like meeting  
payroll,rent and tax demands. Or, and this is far worse, and more common, they
have refused to listen to whoever is in charge of cash flow. Perhaps  
customers
are refusing to pay? Perhaps bad debt has crept up to unacceptable levels?
Perhaps there are no customers left except for the new ones?
Like Dickens's Mr Micawber, instead of doing something to stem the
tide, such owners are always certain that 'something will turn up'. So it does,
often in the form of a writ for bankruptcy or a bailiff's court order.
In the early days of my first UK company, desperately undercapitalised
and without the funds to grow as quickly as I wished, I realised to my horror
that I would run out of cash in a few weeks unless I acted. I went to see a
friend who owned his own small company, who must remain nameless here.
He, too, was concerned about his cash flow. Both of us had already turned
to our respective banks for an overdraft, but our companies were too young
to elicit any such benevolence.
Between us we hatched a plot. (I can think of no other word for what we
did.) I invoiced my friend's company and he invoiced mine, not just once,
but several times over the course of the next few months. Each paid the other
using a company cheque. In Britain, unlike in America, it is not a federal
offence to issue a cheque without the funds in your account at that time to
cover payment, providing you intend to pay. Turnover at both our little
companies increased substantially. We timed our payments precisely, so that
our accounts were just in funds to meet each other's demands. This meant
we both had to pay special attention to our respective cash flows.
I went back to the bank. They were delighted that business was boom-
ing. They were even more delighted that I was monitoring my cash flow so
adroitly. My friend did the same. Eventually, both banks issued each of our
companies an overdraft facility. That facility permitted me to grow at a  
much
faster rate than I could have done otherwise, and eventually produced the
profits necessary to grow further and to pay off the overdraft,
I have no idea if what my friend and I did was illegal, though I doubt it
was. Without question it was not very ethical, although it certainly proved
effective. What I am sure of is that the bank appeared more impressed with
my ability to control cash flow than they were with my company's 'growth'.
That keen-eyed control was the key to unlocking yet more capital, via an
overdraft with which to expand. It bred confidence.
And now we come to a difficult topic. Factoring debt. I feel like ahypocrite as I type this. But then, I have been called worse things in my life
and I have broad shoulders. Factoring debt is like smoking cigarettes. You
know perfectly well that smoking leads to death - but that death, however
appalling, is some way off. And you need a cigarette now!
When you do business with a company that factors debt, you make over
your debts to them. They charge a fee and percentage of the debt. A swinge-
ing percentage. Bingo! You have solved your cash-flow crisis.
Except you haven't. Not in the long run. Factoring is a deal with the
devil, and just like Faust, you will have the worst of the bargain. You should
only factor in absolute extremity. You should be careful in your deal to
ensure you can release your company from the factoring contract without
forking out a massive penalty. Ideally, you should never do it at all. And  
that's
all I have to say about smoking cigarettes or factoring. Both deeply unpleas-
ant, unhealthy and pernicious activities.
Facing up to cash-flow demands and refusing to succumb to the 'ostrich
syndrome' is a paramount concern in any start-up. You can delegate many
tasks when creating a new business, but monitoring and forecasting cash  
flow
is not one of them. It's your responsibility and your task. Nobody else's.
You can improve cash flow by observing the following suggestions in a
start-up's early days:
O  Keep payroll down to an absolute minimum. Overhead walks on two  
legs.
O Never sign long-term rent agreements or take upmarket office space.
Q Never indulge in fancy office or reception furniture, unless your particu-
lar business demands that you make such an impression on clients.
O Never buy a business meal if the other side offers to. You can show off
later.
Q Pay yourself just enough to eat.
Q Do not be shy to call customers who owe you money personally. It works.
O In a city, walk everywhere you can. It's healthy and sets a good example.
O Check all staff travel and entertainment claims with an eagle eye.O  If you're going to be late paying, call the vendor's boss. Give a date. Stick
to it.
O Always meet payroll, even at the expense of starving yourself that week.
O Issuing staff credit cards, company mobile phones or cars is the road
to ruin.
O Leaving lights, computers, printers and copiers on overnight is just stupid.
Q A vase of beautiful flowers in reception every week creates a better
impression than £100,000 worth of fancy Italian furniture.
O  Get used to grovelling. Grovelling is an effective tool in a start-up's cash
flow.
O They want your business. Play one supplier off against another. Ruthlessly.
Q Only enter a factoring deal in absolute extremity. Exit it fast.
O Keep your chin up. It could he worse. You could be working for them.
Cash flow is the lifeblood of arty business. But just as presidents and prime
ministers learn to plan for war and hope for peace, you must plan for the
worst and hope for the best in all matters relating to the cash flowing in and
out of your start-up company.
Regular, even obsessive, monitoring is the key. I hated every minute of
doing it in those early days, but if a bean-counting klutz like me could do it,
then you can too.
THE THIRD ERROR: REINFORCING FAILURE
Probably the two easiest words to write and the hardest error to avoid in this
entire book. We all do it. Even the best of us. And we never stop doing it all
our business lives. This is a disease curable only by iron willpower or 20/20
hindsight.
Reinforcing failure sounds so easy to avoid. If something fails, stop doing
it and start doing something else, right? Er, right. Except, just when do you
decide that you have a 'failure' on your hands? Too late, is the answer -
always too late.
Let's examine the nature of success and failure for a moment. We know
that success has a thousand fathers while failure is famously always an orphan.
Not to mention a bastard. Then again, success has been described as the abil-
ity to go from one failure to another, unrepentant and with no loss of enthu-
siasm. All very well. But how the devil can we judge when a failure hasoccurred so that we can safely cease to reinforce it and move on.
On this matter, all prophets, wits and gurus are silent. My own suspicion
is that many failures are merely a matter of timing. What used to fail now
succeeds. What once was a sure thing now no longer works.
Take the invention of the fax. Fax technology existed for decades before
fax machines were universally adopted. One day my office manager in the US
walked me out in the hall to show me how to use our shiny new fax machine.
'Why do we need one?'
'Because everyone is getting one.'
'OK, but why is everyone getting one? 1
'I don't know. They just are.'
As far as I could see, the technology had not improved much from the
prototype I'd inspected a few years back. But now 'everyone' was getting one.
Failure had transmogrified into success. The fax had reached critical mass.
Take another example. In 1977 (after years of arm wrestling with the
powers that be), Sir Freddie Laker launched his transatlantic Skytrain serv-
ice, an airline offering a no-frills service at about one third of the prices of
his competitors - notably British Airways. It was a huge success for a while,
then failed, collapsing into bankruptcy in 1982 with debts of over £2 50
million. Conventional wisdom in the City and on Wall Street labelled cheap
airlines a flop.
All of a sudden, here in the first decade of the 21st century, bingo! Cheap
airlines are all the rage again and turning over billions of dollars of business
around the globe. A failure one minute, a success the next. It was just a ques-
tion of timing.
What has all this to do with reinforcing failure? It is this possibility, the
chance that we are onto a slow-burn winner, rather than being stuck with an
out-and-out loser, that persuades so many of us (who should know better) to
hang in there with a product or service in financial trouble.
Now settle down, children, and I'll tell you a real sob story. Ten years or
so ago, I invested heavily in a new project, an interactive CD-ROM disc
called Blender, based in New York City. Blender contained interactive 
reviews
of new movies and albums, electronic games, animated cartoons, video inter-
views with celebrities and a host of other features. You stuck it in yourcomputer to play it. Or view it. Or watch it. Or listen to it.
It was a pioneering project that made a huge splash in the media world.
The idea was to publish this CD-ROM every month, just like a magazine.
We had a great marketing line for it, too. 'Stay Cool: Stick Your Head in
a Blender'.
I loved it. So did the rest of the media. We won a zillion awards. The
designers and editors were feted and rivals began to prowl around the corri-
dors wondering if Blender meant the death of ink-on-paper magazines. They
needn't have worried,
Blender wouldn't sell. Whenever we took it to focus groups or gave it
away, kids and techies alike whooped and hollered and told us it was 'so
cool'. I upped the ante. We began advertising it and marketing it. We paid
stores to carry it. We worked days and we worked nights. Sometimes I had
to order the young men and women working on Blender to go home to bed,
they were having so much fun.
In our heart of hearts, we believed we were inventing a new media. We
made plans for specialist Blenders, just like you have specialist magazines:
Blender for cars; Blender for fashion; Blender for new movie releases. My tiny
company was on fire with ideas.
Some pop stars were so keen on Blender they let us have unreleased music
videos and tracks from their forthcoming albums to include on our CD-
ROM
that month. The publishing trade press wrote nice things. I took the concept
back to Britain and tried it there, too. Distributors, retailers, publishing rivals
- everyone was supportive and applauded this new concept. Everyone except
the bloody customers, that is. And every issue sold worse than the last.
A very great retailer once said: 'There is no victory over customers.' Oh
boy, did he get that right. But I was convinced that if only people would
sample Blender they would become addicted. Who was I kidding?
Did I quit at $1 million loss? No. Did I quit at $3 million loss? No. Only
when I had lost over $5 million did I come to my senses. Five million dollars
was a lot of chump change for an individual entrepreneur back in the 1990s.
Come to think of it, it still is. Blender wasn't even a part of my core publish-
ing business. That meant I was investing money personally. My five million
had come from after-tax dollars! Just how dumb can one guy be? I had
forgotten John Dryden's advice.
Errors, like straws, upon the surface flow;He who would search for pearls must dive below.
JOHN DRYDEN-, ALL FOR LOVE Or. THE WORLD WELL LOST
I had forgotten to 'dive below'. I was in awe at the pretty patterns the straw
made on the surface. And because I would not give in, my stubbornness
turned into a jujitsu master and slammed me to the mat again and again.
Why did I continue to reinforce failure, week after week, month after
month, year after year? It's a question I have often asked myself - with no
satisfactory answer. The best I can give you is that I came to believe too
much in the concept of a regularly published CD-ROM disc and was
seduced by the technology. In addition, the Blender staff, headed by David
Cherry and Jason Pearson, were a great group of people, hard working,
talented, innovative, and fun to be around.
In short, I fell in love with the project. I did not listen to my financial
advisors or my long-time partners in other companies. I just stuck in there
and got myself killed for my pains. Nobody would have thought any the less
of Blender (or my company) if I had pulled the plug at $2 million of loss  
after
a couple of years. That would make sense.
So right now, with the interest that would have accrued in eight years, I
could have four million extra dollars sitting around in a bank account.
Four million dollars. Think about it. That's the price of reinforcing fail-
ure. Good luck in your own attempts at avoiding it. It's obvious that I don't
know how to!
(NB: One good thing came out of Blender. I had registered the name
and trademark worldwide in my enthusiasm, an expensive undertaking.
When we launched a music magazine a few years later in America, I called it
Blender and re-registered it - a far less expensive procedure. Today,  
Blender
is a success, the only music magazine to come anywhere close to giving the
venerable Rolling Stone a run for its money. It would be nice to have an extra
$4 million to promote it though!)
THE FOURTH ERROR: THINKING SMALL AND ACTING BIG
Here comes the painful bit. The bit I really do not want to write. The bit
that will exhibit yours truly in the worst possible light.All well, dear reader, you have paid money for this book and you deserve
the straight goods. I will comfort myself while composing it (though it's not
much comfort, to be honest) with the knowledge that my behaviour was far
from unique. Others were there long before me and many are in training
right now to take my place in the endless queue of idiots who succumb each
year. At least I made it out alive.
Indeed, for a while, I got it the right way round. But then the thinking-
small-and-acting-big syndrome kicked in and I nearly lost it all - and not just
the money. What a cock-up I made of it. But let's start at the beginning.
When I had my first real financial success in 1974 publishing Kung-Fu
Monthly, a one-shot poster-magazine about the martial-artist film star Bruce
Lee, I had already begun thinking big. There's nothing wrong with think-
ing big.
The fact that this teeny-weeny one-shot had Monthly in the title caused
a certain amount of mirth in the British magazine business. One-shots are
not unknown by any means, but calling them monthlies is coming it a trifle
high. Anyway, just how much could hippy journalists who knew nothing
about kung-fu publish about one man twelve times a year? Even my friendly
distributors only gave KFM a year before it folded.
To everyone's surprise, not least my own, KFM continued to be
published for ten years, and each issue was dedicated almost exclusively to
extolling the virtues of Bruce Lee. It has to be said that we had one or two
things in our favour.
Firstly, Bruce Lee had lived fast and died young, always a great career
move for any movie star. Secondly, it is impossible to libel a dead man,  
legally
speaking. Thirdly, he was popular in virtually every country in the world,
including the Third World. Fourthly, I had obtained a huge stash of Bruce
Lee photographs by sending my friend, Don Atyeo, to Hong Kong at the
time of Bruce Lee's funeral. Don is a great journalist. He set about inter-
viewing everyone who had ever known Bruce Lee. Those interviews served
as the basis for my magazine for more than a decade.
How else was I thinking big? As soon as Kung-Fu Monthly No. 1 was
published (it sold over 100,000 copies right off the bat), I got on aeroplanes.
Dozens of aeroplanes. In country after country after country, together with
an Australian lawyer friend, Andrew Fisher, I licensed Kung-Fu Monthly to
numerous foreign publishing companies. Eventually, there was even aChinese edition of Kung-fu Monthly, along with German, French, Italian,
Swedish, Dutch, Spanish and Arabic editions.
Then I flew to America. Economy class. I will never forget the two weeks
I spent trudging the streets of the Big Apple looking for a partner to publish
Kung-Fu Monthly in the States. My hair was still hallway down my back. My
high-heeled snakeskin boots, Mr Fish tie and Tommy Nutter knock-off suit
were not exactly what American businessmen were used to.
One of my heroes was Stan Lee and his Marvel comic empire, which
published The Incredible Hulk, Spiderman and my personal favourite The 
Silver
Surfer. To cut a painful ten minutes short, Mr Lee had me tossed out of their
Midtown offices. One publisher after another took one look at me and my 
puny
little product and showed me the door. Nobody was even remotely  
interested.
In desperation I went to visit a British ex-pat whose name had been given
to me by my friend Tony Elliott of Time Out magazine in London. His name
was Peter. Together with his partner, Bob, Peter was just starting up his own
magazine company in New York City. His office was shared, more of a cubi-
cle really, but respectable. His demeanour inscrutable. But he had two things
going for him - he had capital and he had the contacts to make publishing
KFM possible over there.
Slowly and methodically Peter examined my sample issues of Kung-Fu
Monthly and began asking me questions relating to costs, sales -and the
unusual format of a poster-magazine. 'Let me get this straight,' he said. This
thing is really an uncut sixteen-page signature from a normal magazine and
yet you charge the price of a whole magazines to the reader.'
'You've got it,' I replied. 'You can charge that kind of money,' I went on
breathlessly, 'because when they finish reading it, kids can hang it on the wall
as a cheap poster.'
Peter looked up at me and smiled. 'I'll try it. I have to try it. What can
we lose?' Peter and Robert are still my American partners thirty years later.
KFM was a success in America. And one magazine led to another. Over the
years, Peter, Bob and I have risked hundreds of millions of dollars together.
We have created jobs for thousands of Americans. We have become rich.
Thinking big. That's the secret. Of the dozens of independent magazine
publishers in Britain back in the 1970s, hardly one of them dared to thinkbig enough to get on an aeroplane and hawk their wares in the biggest
market in the world. Those few that did so, licensed their magazines in
America. They never thought to create a partnership and risk their own capi-
tal. Not even the largest British magazine publishers, conglomerates like IPC
thought to risk it. Perhaps they had too much to lose?
But the corollary of thinking big is to act small. Just because you have a
success or two under your belt doesn't mean you have it made. 'Success is
never permanent; failure is never fatal. The only thing that really counts is to
never, never, never give up.' That's that old windbag Winston Churchill
again. But he was bang on the money there.
Once you begin to believe that you are infallible, that success will auto-
matically lead to more success, and that you have 'got it made', reality will be
sure to give you a rude wake-up call. Believing your own bullshit is always a
perilous activity, but never more fatal than for the owner of a start-up  
venture.
By acting small, I mean remaining in touch. Remaining flexible.
Constantly examining how your company could do better. Keeping a sense
of proportion and humility. Not throwing your weight around playing the
great 'I Am'. Remembering that much of your success so far has been
achieved by dumb luck.
Acting small in the early days of your business sets an example to those
around you. If staff see you indulging in long lunch hours and purchasing
yourself a fancy company car, then they are either going to resent it or they
are going to emulate you. This is not a good thing. You can do all that stuff
later, when you've made your first fifty million.
Most of the worst errors I have made in my life came from forgetting to
act small. It's hard to do when you're rolling around in coin and everything
is going your way. But acting big leads to complacency, and complacency is
the reason that many successful start-ups falter.
Every day you have to hit the ground running, putting in more hours
than even your most dedicated member of staff. You have to stay flexible.  
You
have to be willing to listen and to learn and to emulate success elsewhere.  
If
you don't, if you think you have already made the cut, if you're thinking
'game over: time to party', then bad stuff begins to happen very quickly.
I know all this because in the late 1980s and early 1990s I forgot toremember to act small. I spent millions of dollars on drinking, taking drugs
and running around with whores. I lost all respect for money and for the
blood, sweat and treasure I had expended to acquire it. I was acting big.
In a single decade I got through more than a hundred million dollars
living high on the hog. At one time, there were no less than fourteen
'mistresses' depending on a regular stipend from my personal bank account.
A single evening's entertainment could come to thirty or forty thousand in
the Big Apple, London or Hong Kong. There was nothing I could not do -
I was king of the world. Acting big.
Even though I was not so foolish as to use company money for this
idiocy, my business still suffered and my health suffered. Some good  
people
I trusted stopped working with me. It was absolutely the stupidest thing I
have ever done. And it very nearly killed me.
Eventually, I was hospitalised. When the doctors there heard how much
cocaine and booze I had been imbibing over the past few years, they went
ballistic. In brutal words of one syllable at a time, they warned me that  
either
I was through with drugs and booze or they were through with me. One of
them, a young doctor with a stutter, summed it all up: 'M-M-Mr Dennis,
you are ac-ac-acting as if you ha-ha-have a one-way ticket to ga-ga-gaol or
the mo-mor-morgue. Wh-wh-which do you wa-wa-want it to be?'
He'd got that right. Acting big.
Eventually I wised up and began to straighten out my life. I escaped by
the skin of my teeth from the consequences of acting big. Almost as if by
magic, the business began to make progress again. I hurled myself back into
the fray, gave up all narcotics (probably the hardest thing I have ever done),
stuck to wine as far as the booze went and told the whores to take a hike.
And I have been a far, far happier man ever since. And probably a nicer
man. The scars are still there and the damage is done, no getting away from
that. But with every passing year it all feels like it happened to someone else.
Think big, act small. It's a recipe that never goes out of style. While espe-
cially important for start-ups, it will serve you faithfully long after you have
established yourself as a serious player. A successful and naturally modest
entrepreneur is an object of reverence and respect in the business world.
Even if such a fabulous beast is rarer than hens' teeth.
And all ill all, it's a lot more fun than strutting around like some obnox-ious mini-mogul. Even today, I blush at the thought of the loot I wasted and
the shenanigans I got up to when I forgot to act small.
Never again, brothers and sisters. Never again. End of sermon.
THE FIFTH ERROR: SKIMPING ON TALENT
If you are determined to be rich, there is only one talent you require. Can
you think what it is before your eyes skim down to the next paragraph?
Right. You need the talent to identify, hire and nurture others with
talent. 'There is no substitute for talent. Industry and al1 the virtues are of
no avail,' wrote the novelist Aldous Huxley. I have never been much of a fan
of his as far as literature is concerned, but in this Huxley is correct.
Any company managed and run by plodders and jobsworths will be lucky
to survive, let atone prosper. Talent is the key to sustained growth, and
growth is the key to early wealth. You have to identify and hire talent. You
can't skimp on it.
Sometimes, to ensure that a talented individual will work for you, or will
stay working with you, you need to be flexible. Money is not always the  
great
motivator here. Talented people want a good salary, of course, but surpris-
ingly often they are more attracted to new opportunities and challenges.
Stephen Colvin, my CEO at Dennis Publishing in New York City, is a
good case in point. A Belfast lad who came to London and made a name for
himself selling advertising for Dennis, his obvious talent acted as a magnet
for my rivals. In secret (this is not as unusual as it sounds), one particular rival
flew him and his wife, Pippa, to the west coast of America and tempted him
with a senior management position.
Stephen and Pippa were delighted with America and they decided to take
the chance to live and work there. Who could blame them? The USA is a
long way from the streets of Belfast.
As soon as I had heard the news, I acted. Stephen is not a greedy chap.
Putting his salary up in the UK would not be enough to hold him. So what
did he want? He wanted to live and work in America.
At that time, I was busy losing money on my Blender CD-ROM in the
States and working with Peter and Bob on MicroWarehouse, a publicly
quoted catalogue reseller of hardware and software we had founded some
years before. MicroWarehouse was a two-billion-dollar corporation and mypublishing activities in the USA were more or less a sideshow.
What could I offer Stephen Colvin to ensure that I preserved his talent
from being poached? I asked Stephen to fly and meet me at my lakeside 
cottage
in Connecticut. He wasn't too keen on the idea. He knew perfectly well  
that
I was going to try to 'turn' him. And he knew, too, that I did not have a
Dennis operation in the States that would interest him. Nevertheless he  
came.
When Stephen arrived, I took, him down to the dock and we boarded my
boat. A few beers and a high-speed ride later, I cut the engine and we sat
looking at each other while the boat bobbed gently on the surface of
Candlewood lake. I was careful not to break the delicious silence. Finally,
Stephen spoke: 'Felix, I'm not going to stay at Dennis. It's a great company
but I want to move on and Pippa and I want to come to America.'
I nodded, And I swear to God, it was only at that moment that I realised
what I might be able to do.
'What is the position they're offering you?'
'Vice president,' he replied.
'How would you like to be president of an American company?'
'What company?'
'Dennis Publishing, Inc.'
'There is no Dennis Publishing, Inc, Felix. Just Blender and a few bits
and bobs.'
'Ah, but there will be a Dennis Publishing, Inc, Stephen. And soon.'
'What is it going to publish?'
'What would you like it to publish, Stephen? You're the bloody president!'
He couldn't refuse. This was the chance he had always wanted. I was
going to keep my talent and Stephen was going to come to America. As a
last added bonus, I told him that he, Pippa and his children could use my
lake cottage whenever they wanted.
A few years later he won an industry award as 'most valued young CEO in
media' or some such nonsense. More importantly he built Dennis Publishing,
Inc for me brick by brick. And built his own reputation in the process.When you come across real talent, it is sometimes worth allowing them
to create the structure in which they choose to labour. In nine cases out of
ten, by inviting them to take responsibility and control for a new venture,
you will motivate them to do great things. It is possible that I would have
succeeded in rebuilding Dennis in America without Steve's help. But I doubt
that it would have been as much fun. And I doubt, too, that we would have
succeeded to the degree we did.
Talent is usually conscious of its own value. But the currency of that value
is not necessarily a million-dollar salary. The opportunity to prove themselves,
and sometimes the chance to run the show on a day-to-day basis, will often
do the trick just as well. This holds true even if talent is placed in the driver's
seat of a small division within an existing operation. What talent seeks, as
often as not, is the chance to prove itself and the opportunity to excel.
My advice on this subject was contained in the second paragraph of this
section. You must identify talent. Then you must move heaven and earth to hire
it. You must nurture it, reward it property and protect it from being poached. If
necessary, dream up a new project. Better still, get the talent to dream it up.
Youth is a further factor. By the time talent is in its mid-to-late forties or
early fifties, it will have become very, very expensive. Young talent can be
found and underpaid for a short while, providing the work is challenging
enough. Then it will be paid at the market rate. Finally, it will reach a stage
where it is being paid based on past reputation alone. That is when you must
part company with it.
The French impressionist Degas once said: 'Everybody has talent at
twenty-five. The difficult thing is to have it at fifty.' True enough. Most
talent does not survive undiminished through its middle forties, although
there are some stunning exceptions to this rule of thumb.
Anybody wishing to become rich cannot do so without talent. Either
their own, or far more likely, on the back of the talent of others. Talent is
indispensable, although it is always replaceable. Just remember the simple
rules concerning talent: identify it, hire it, nurture it, reward it, protect it.
And, when the time comes, fire it.
If you can do all these things with talent in the context of building your
own company, I would be truly astonished if you did not become rich.
Because the truth is, talent does most of the work for you. Just as it has done
since the beginning of recorded history.
After all, who built the pyramids? The pharaohs or the engineers?Think about it.
Then go hire some talent - just like they did.PART THREE
GETTING
RICH9
C A R D  I N  A L
VIRTUES
And slowly answered Arthur from the barge:
'The old order changeth, yielding place to new,
And God fulfils Himself in many ways,
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.
Comfort thyself- what comfort is in me?'
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON, MORTE D'ARTHUR
In this chapter, I intend to deal with the cardinal virtues of getting rich. I
intend, too, to deal with some common misconceptions that have cropped
up on those occasions when people have taxed me about how a guy like me
(to misquote John Lennon) got richer than they did.
One thing is certain, it has little to do with merit or fairness. After all,
was Pete Best, the 'Fifth Beatle' that Brian Epstein forced to resign from the
original group, really that much less of a drummer than Ringo Starr?
Probably not. Who would want to end up a Fifth Beatle?
PERSISTENCE
If at first you don't succeed, try, try, try again.
Then quit. No use being a damn fool about it.
W.C. FIELDS, AMERICAN HUMORIST (ATTR.)
You will find in the pages of most so-called 'self-improvement' books by
quacks (defined as those who have never done it themselves but feel justified
in pontificating about it), a great deal of drivel concerning the importance of
persistence. In such books, this word is usually spelt with a capital 'P' and is
treated as an object of idolatry and reverence.
Fortunately, this is not a 'self-improvement' book. I do not believe
anyone can be 'improved' by buying and reading a book. They can only be
'improved', if that is the word, by their own actions.
If anything, How to Get Rich is something ever-so-slightly new in the
world, or at least I have tried to make it so. It is an 'anti-self-improvement'
book - because it admits openly that the chances of anyone reading it andthen becoming rich are minuscule. The vast majority of you are far too nice.
And comfortable. And sensible.
My book points out, in harsh detail, the damage to your present
contentment and the risk to future and existing relationships that you run
by seeking to get rich. It also deals with the coarsening of your nature that
will accompany the rough and tumble of acquiring a piece of the pie from
another's table. It points out, too, that avarice is tremendously time-
consuming and that time is in somewhat short supply - our lives are way
too short.
To return to our subject, persistence is important, no doubt about it, and
requires a concerted effort of will and stamina to maintain. But it is not an
end in itself.
Persistence spelt with a capital 'P' (except at the beginning of a sentence)
represents the same old error that one discovers in nearly all 'self-improve-
ment' books, not to mention in the men and women who write them.
They see a rich person with their finger pointing at the sky and, like the
saps they are, they stare at the finger. Then they write about the finger and
call their books: 'Become A Millionaire By Pointing Your Finger At The
Sky', not realising that their subject was merely attempting to draw their
attention to a glorious sunset. No matter; such authors will stubbornly
persist in their error. As do most of their readers.
Stubbornness is not persistence. Stubbornness implies you intend to
persist despite plentiful evidence that you should not. A stubborn person
fears to be shown he or she is wrong. A persistent person is convinced that
he or she has been right all along, and that the proof lies just around the
corner. That with just a little further effort, the veil of failure will be torn
away to reveal success. And the difference is...?
The difference between the two is as crucial and as intangible as the dotted
line on a map across a desert separating one country from another. These  
lines
appear to be of little importance. They are of no importance to the living  
crea-
tures that inhabit the landscape. A desert gerbil does not think to itself, 'So
now I am crossing from the United Arab Emirates into Saudi Arabia.'
But at some time in the future, that dotted line that looked so pitiful to
us a moment ago compared with the harsh realities of nature, may become
terribly important. It may represent billions of dollars in oil revenues. It maymean the difference between wealth and mere subsistence.
'Never give in' is a useful catchphrase. But don't take it too literally. We
must all surrender at some time, to love or desire or death. You will be forced
into the last of these, and a fool if you never surrender to the first. But never
give in easily. If you can, attempt one step further along the road than
appears sensible before giving in.
So-called 'persistence' is a vital attribute for those who wish to become
rich, or who wish to achieve anything worthwhile for that matter. As is the 
abil-
ity to acknowledge that one has made a mistake and that a new plan of action
must now be made. Any such acknowledgement is not a weakness, it is a sign
of clear thinking. In its way, it is a kind of persistence in itself. Try, try, try 
again,
does not mean doing what has already failed, over and over again.
Quitting is not dishonourable. Quitting when you believe you can still
succeed is. You must keep the faith. Belief in yourself and faith in your proj-
ect can move mountains. But not if you insist on trying to scale the moun-
tain by an impossible route which has already failed.
History is full of examples of success stories that very nearly had an
unhappy ending - because it all seemed so hard, because of discouragement
and the feeling that the gods were laughing up their sleeve at those involved.
And often, because of a sneaking, horrible suspicion that while the destina-
tion was right, the road map was badly flawed.
Years ago, my American partners and I went into a new business, a mail-
order business for personal computer software and hardware. Who was to be
in charge of creating and designing our new mail-order catalogue? I was the
natural choice for this task. My experience in publishing so many personal
computer magazines made it obvious.
My colleagues and I worked hard on this project. My chief designer was
even sleeping in our New York offices to meet the deadline for a few weeks.
It was painstaking and exhausting work with no room for error. When we
had all the basic designs in place, I reviewed them carefully.
They were a flop. They didn't work. Something was wrong and we all
knew it, I was beside myself with worry. This was such an important project
and my partners, Peter and Bob, were relying on me to get it right. I almost
called them and told them to give the project to someone else - which would
not have done much to foster friendly partnership relations. There wassimply no time in the launch deadline.
But what else could I do? The damn thing was just not right. I was on
the wrong track and found it difficult even to articulate what was wrong.
Wrong it was. But why?
An associate who had worked with me for some years, Susan Freeman,
made the crucial observation. She was neither a designer nor particularly
knowledgeable about computers. But she had a keen eye and was involved
in the project up to her neck, 'It looks rather like a magazine,' she said. 'It
doesn't look like a catalogue. That can't be right.'
Of course! I had been urging my team, subconsciously, to create yet
another magazine. But mail-order catalogues do not have 'readers'. They
have potential buyers of goods. We had fallen into the trap of doing what we
were trained to do. We were in such a rush that, instead of starting out with
a blank sheet, we had moved onto automatic pilot. Every person on the team
was a magazine professional of some kind. Dumb, dumb, dumb.
Armed with this insight we went back to a collection of successful cata-
logues of all shapes and sizes that Susan had gathered together at the begin-
ning of the project. Using these as a template, we persevered. Within days,
we had come up with a new catalogue design that worked so well it was still
in use years later. Not to mention that many of the original elements we
incorporated were later 'borrowed' by our rivals.
Persistence had done the trick - but only with Susan's insight. Do not be
afraid to change tack, alter course or make new plans with whatever you are
attempting to achieve. Especially if you sense that you are on the wrong track.
Above all, avoid banging your head against the same piece of wall. The
wall will not get any softer. And don't give up - if you want to be rich.
SELF-BELIEF
No one can make you feel inferior without your consent.
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT
This is the core of it. Persistence is not quite as important as self-belief. I have
known people who believed in themselves, who acted on that belief, got lucky
quickly and got rich. Persistence merely offers a second or third bite at the
cherry. Your belief in yourself brought you to the cherry bowl in the first 
place.
Self-belief is a priceless asset. We may detest arrogance, yet isn't it true
that we admire it a little, too? Even though arrogance is a poor, shabby thingcompared with rooted self-belief. It is an imitation of the real thing.
Why do we covertly admire such attributes? Because such people often
have what the ancients called 'the look of eagles' about them, which has little
to do with their appearance. Single-handedly, individuals with ingrained self-
belief (and, usually, a dollop of arrogance) have changed the destiny of 
nations.
We have had one such in the past century in England. Perhaps he was a
warmonger. Perhaps he was an incompetent strategist and a jingoist and an
empire builder and a silly old buffoon, especially about the rights of women.
But Winston Churchill's sense of his own destiny - his unshakeable self-
belief
- was, for a while, all that Britain contained in its arsenal after Dunkirk.
There were few tanks and less artillery in England in 1940. The British
Expeditionary Force had left them behind on the fields and beaches of
Belgium and France, All that stood between a democratic, frightened people
suing for peace with a  treacherous madman intent on his dream of absolute
European domination, was a tired old man with a microphone - along with
a few hundred Spitfires and the remnants of the mightiest navy the world had
ever known.
Within the British Cabinet and the British aristocracy there lay a hidden
yearning for peace. Even an admiration for Fascism as a bulwark against the
Communist hordes. Peace at any price. Peace to save the world that had
supported and enriched Britain's aristocrats for countless generations. Peace,
even though they knew full well what Hitler had already done in those  
coun-
tries now swarming with what Churchill described as 'the odious apparatus
of the Gestapo'.
His Cabinet colleague, Lord Halifax, would have made peace with Nazi
Germany in an instant. As would Neville Chamberlain, the previous prime
minister, known as 'the apostle of appeasement'.
And if we had made peace, which would have meant disarming ourselves
and handing over our air force and, perhaps, our navy to the Nazis, where
would Europe be now? And what language would we all be speaking? What
would our beliefs be? Which gods would we worship? How many millions
upon millions of those among us would have 'disappeared'? And how many
would never have been born?
Ignore his politics, and even his principles, by all means. But to readWinston Churchill's speeches today, and, better still, to hear his recordings
of them, is to understand the astonishing power and mesmeric quality of
self-belief.
Younger men and women may mock all they wish but the iron determi-
nation and self-belief of this one old man, this old man with a BBC micro-
phone, meant more to Britain at that moment than all the kings and queens
in her long history.
For just one moment, a democratic people were saved from fear of fail-
ure, and from the fear of fear itself; from the shame of capitulation to evil -
by what? By one old man's belief in his own destiny, by his insane, unprinci-
pled self-belief, and the belief in the destiny of his country and of freedom
in Western Europe.
I am not asking you to be Winston Churchill. None of us could be, or
would necessarily want to be. He was a child of his time. But I do ask that
you begin, right now, right at this very moment, to ask yourself whether you
believe in yourself.
Truly. Do you believe in yourself? Do you? If you do not, and, worse still,
if you believe you never can believe, then by all means go on reading this
book. But take it from me, your only chance of getting rich will come from
the lottery or inheritance. If you will not believe in yourself, then why should
anyone else?
Without self-belief nothing can be accomplished. With it, nothing is
impossible. It is as brutal and as black and white as that. If you take no other
memory from this book, then take that single thought. It was worth a damn
sight more than the price you paid for it, I assure you.
Which does not mean that you should trample on doubt. Doubts are like
pain. If pain was to be eliminated from humankind, how would we receive
warning that something was happening to our body requiring urgent atten-
tion? In many situations, pain must be ameliorated - during surgical opera-
tions, recovery from serious injury or in the throes of dying, for instance.  
But
to eliminate pain entirely from our lives would not be a sensible objective or
in our best interests.
Doubt, too, is a warning system and plays its part in reaching decisions.
An important part. Without doubt, as was the case with Hitler's Youth
Brigades, there is only naked ego and the kind of certainty that leads to
untrammelled arrogance, and worse. Sometimes far, far worse. There isnothing wrong with doubt, or with fear. They are immensely useful tools.
But you either learn to incorporate them into your thinking and your life, or
you will be ruled by them. There is no 'middle way'.
It is doubt multiplied by the fear of failure, unconfronted, which leads to
the creation of a vicious cycle where self-belief is eroded and nothing is
achieved. Doubts can and should be confronted, as should fear. This is best
done in daylight, under rigorous examination. (Three o'clock in the morn-
ing is a difficult time to confront any such messengers.) Write down your
doubts and fears. Examine them. Hold them up to the light. Suck the
wisdom out of them and discard their husks in the trash.
Are there things that can be done to bolster self-belief? I believe there are,
but they are mostly beyond the remit of this little book. This book deals only
with the getting of wealth. I will leave you with two thoughts on the subject.
Firstly, if you have ever escaped from very serious trouble indeed, or have
been at the point of death, then one of two things happens. Either you
become cautious to an absurd degree, or you are liberated from many ordi-
nary fears. With liberation comes the knowledge that nothing is really very
important in the lives of men; nothing is as terrifying as the fear itself. And
from that, paradoxically, comes self-belief - a belief that anything is  
possible.
Secondly, you should remember that you are unique. Any scientist will
tell you so. No other human was ever born, or will ever be born, with the
same combination of upbringing, flaws and qualities that you possess. Why
should you not believe in yourself?
Even the fact of your existence, that you were created by the swiftest
sperm of the millions let loose upon the luckiest of eggs that day, is a mira-
cle. What were the odds that it would be you who would result? Yes, you,
sitting in your chair reading these words right now. How then, could you  
not
believe in yourself: Nature did. Destiny did. Or, if you wish, your God did.
This business of piling up wealth is an easy business. Easy, that is,
compared with giving birth, or raising children, or pressing on a parent's
doorbell at midnight to tell them their child has died in an accident. Or nurs-
ing children you know will never grow to adulthood, or pulling rocks on
rollers under the lash of brutal overseers to build a monument to a deranged
pharaoh. How easy do they sound?
If you will only believe that you can do it and give it your best shot, thenwhether or not you succeed, you will perhaps dislodge a pebble that will
ricochet down the very small mountain of your life, creating an avalanche
that other fools will stand in awe of. You will not find me among them clap-
ping, but you will certainly find enough applause to repay you for the effort.
You may even grow to enjoy the process.
If you want to be rich you must work for it. But you must believe in it,
too. You must believe in yourself, if only to armour yourself against the
laughter of the gods in your quest. Your mad quest to be rich.
TRUST YOUR INSTINCTS
Come to the edge.
We might fall.
Come to the edge.
It's too high!
COME TO THE EDGE!
And they came
and he pushed
and they flew. . .
CHRlSTOPHER LOGUE, 'COME TO THE EDGE'
Ten years ago, somebody (I never did discover who) popped a copy of a new
magazine into the bag I leave in the reception lobby of Dennis Publishing's
London headquarters. I'd never heard of it. It was slim. Very slim, indeed.
Not usually a good sign for a magazine. And it was printed on low-grade
paper with barely any advertisements. The design was basic, to say the least.
It even felt a bit grubby.
But I liked it. It was an old idea, remodelled. When Henry Luce co-
founded Time magazine back in 1923, his first instinct had been to create a
news digest, culled from news sources around the world. In the end, he  
took
a more expansive editorial route and built one of the greatest magazines ever
published in any language.
This one was called The Week. I read it twice through, slowly, on my jour-
ney back to Warwickshire that night. I doubt it took me an hour. The idea was
simple - though, as I found out later, not at all simple to execute. Excerpts  and
snippets from scores of newspapers and other sources, all carefully credited,
were grouped together in sections. The columns had witty headlines like
'Boring But Important' and 'It Must Be True, I Read It in the Tabloids'.
There were precis of articles from newspapers and magazines in Britain,
Europe, America and Asia. (How had the editor translated some of them, I
wondered?) There was a collection of maps with arrows pointing at cities
and countries in the news that week. There were book, music and art
reviews and sections on health, travel, technology and property. I especially
liked the little box marked 'Health Scare of the Week' and the tiny 200-
word 'Editor's Letter'.
It was cute. Clever. But it didn't stand a chance. It had no ads. No distri-
bution clout. No marketing - or, surely, I would have heard of it? Not a
chance in the world for The Week, then.
So of course I wrote a letter to its founder, Jolyon Conneli, who, it
turned out, was an ex-Fleet Street journalist and editor, congratulating him
on his idea. I suggested he drop by my private office any time he was pass-
ing. Then I forgot about it, although a couple more editions found their way
into my hands in the months that passed.
Jolyon eventually did drop by. He was looking for investors. He already
had a ton of them, many of them his friends, but the amounts they had
invested were not large.Everyone liked the idea, of The Week, and nearly everyone liked Jolyon,
but nobody was about to pony up hundreds of thousands of pounds to
support it. He had sold his house in London to kickstart the project and had
moved his family to the country. Brave chap. It showed guts. I liked him,
although we could not have come from more different backgrounds, or
sported more different personalities.
Hindsight is a perfect science, and Jolyon may disagree with this version
of history, but my recollection is that the writing was on the wall for The
Week. Without question its accounts were an absolute mess - not so unusual
with underfunded start-ups.
Several large publishers have since implied that they would have invested
if I had not. My answer to that is: why didn't they, then? After all, as Jolyon
was the first to point out, he had never heard of me, or Dennis Publishing.
The truth is that nobody else offered to invest big money in The Week
because nobody else believed it could ever work financially. Not as a major
title, anyway.
My board of directors at Dennis Publishing certainly didn't. They were
dead against my investing in such a weekly. Weeklies eat up cash, especially
weeklies with debts, no advertising, a pitiful number of subscribers, no news-
stand sales and a bundle of small investors. Voices were raised in that board-
room. Loud voices.
What I hadn't the courage to tell my fellow directors at that meeting, or,
for a day or two, even my financial guru, Ian Leggett, was that I had already
invested. I loved the concept. I was going to own a piece of The Week. And
to hell with naysayers.
That's easy to say. But it's not good business. It's rude and arrogant to
invest in a company you intend to bring into your stable without a thorough
and honest discussion of the pros and cons with senior colleagues. Like I
said, it's not good business. But it is the only business an entrepreneur has  
any
right to be doing.
I am not a manager. I am not even a businessman. I'm an entrepreneur
and I go with my gut. After that, managers and bean-counters and financial
advisors take over. But only afterwards.
I had the money and I had the 'feeling'. The 'feeling' is when the hair
rises slightly on the back of your arms and neck and you know you are on
the scent of something you shouldn't be doing - but you're going to doanyway, it's called commercial instinct. You develop it over the years. You
certainly aren't born with it. I had it with The Week.
Watching an experienced entrepreneur come into contact with a poten-
tial pot of money is like watching a prone lioness raise her nose and sniff.  
She
cuffs her cubs away. Then she sniffs some more. Then she rises and pads  
away
to hunt. Alone. She can't see it. She can't hear it. But she can scent it. She
knows prey is close. It means food. Prey is her business. It's mine, too.
So I invested heavily in The Week. It lost money. What did you expect?
Ian Leggett was desperately concerned that I had bitten off more than I
could chew. He had a right to be concerned.
I asked some talented people to help out from Dennis Publishing, care-
ful myself not to interfere with the creation of the editorial product. They
already had that right. It did not need messing with. The Week promptly lost
more money, so I bought out all of the minority investors, except for Jolyon
Connell, the founder, and the editor, Jeremy O'Grady.
Slowly, almost imperceptibly, The Week began to take off. I remember the
thrill one evening when I heard a person I did not know at a dinner party
quote straight out of my magazine. Even more unbelievably, readers began
to proselytise. No, I mean it. Not just express satisfaction, but proselytise like
religious fundamentalists. Like true believers. In thirty years of publishing, I
had never seen anything like it.
Strangers would buttonhole me at gatherings and tell me how many
subscriptions to The Week they were responsible for amongst their friends.
Then they would demand that I did not change a thing in the magazine. I
was to leave the editorial alone, did I hear? I heard. I never had any intention
of messing with it, although I did ask Jolyon and Jeremy to introduce obit-
uaries and the weather into its pages, which they did. Imagine that: a maga-
zine which reports on last week's weather!
I met famous people, I mean really famous people: prime ministers and
presidents and movie producers and A-list movie stars, who were only inter-
ested in talking to me because I owned The Week. Week by week with every
issue the magazine gained more readers, a hundred extra a week, then two
hundred, then three hundred. And nobody ever appeared to cancel their
subscription.You can guess the result. The Week is now the most profitable magazine
I own in the UK. Pound for pound (revenues divided by cost), it is the most
profitable magazine I have ever owned. Its margin is terrific. Today, it has
more paid subscribers in Britain than one of the most venerable magazines
in the world, The Economist.
The Week has launched in the USA and is busy becoming a huge success
there, as well, under its editor-in-chief, William Falk, though it cost me $50
million to get it to break even. Justin Smith, its general manager,  
approached
a legend in the newspaper business, Sir Harold Evans, who swiftly perceived
its potential. Harry is now editor-at-large for The Week in the USA - he was
never slow to spot a winner.
Trust your instincts. Do not be a slave to them, but when your instincts
are screaming, Go! Go! Go! then it's time for you to decide whether you  
really
want to be rich or not. You cannot do this in a deliberate, considered  
manner.
You can't get rich painting by numbers. You can only do it by becoming a
predator, by waiting patiently, by remaining alert and constantly sniffing the
air and by bringing massive, murderous force to bear upon your prey when
you pounce.
You can share the kill later, by all means. But if you want to get rich, trust
your own judgement when it calls - and leave those whose job it is to
manage your business to pick up the pieces. They can have the scraggy bits.
But the heart and liver are yours.
MAKE MORE BASKETS: DIVERSIFY!
As it will be in the future, it was at the birth of Man-
There are only four things certain since Social Progress began-
That the Dog returns to his Vomit and the Sow returns to her Mire,
And the burnt Fool's bandaged finger goes wabbling back to the Fire ...
RUDYARD  KIPLING , THE GODS OF THE COPYBOOK  HEADINGS '
Eggs being what they are and the world being what it is, they will sometimes
break. No matter how good your idea, how fierce your resolve and how
lucky you are in the early days, you must prepare for that eventuality. It will
come. It always comes.
I am one of the richest self-made men in Britain for two reasons. I own
my company outright, and I began to make more baskets the minute the firsthad a few eggs in it. Let's get down to how and why.
Forget the magazine business. Take any business and any idea. You need
focused, tunnel vision to get it on the road and to begin making some money.
You can expand it, maybe franchise it or take it to other cities or even other
countries. But, in reality, it is still the same basket with a lot more eggs in it.
If you had created a chain of fast-food stores, then it would be unwise to
leave matters there. Public tastes change and customers are fickle. To protect
your investment, you would need to create new baskets. You would need to
consider, perhaps, the creation of or the acquisition of a soft-drink operation.
Or of a branded coffee. And you don't have to be such a massively success-
ful chain to do it. Because, sometimes, the new basket will be worth more
than the old.
Take Chock full o'Nuts. (Please!) This is probably the stupidest name ever
given to a'first-rate coffee. (It's still hugely popular in New York City,  
where
I buy it myself at the local supermarket.) And why has it got such a dumb
name? Because Mr William Black, who in 1923 founded a single store sell-
ing shelled nuts on Broadway and 43rd Street, built himself another basket.
When he reached eighteen shelled-nut stores, he started to sell coffee.
The first basket paid the rent. But the second basket made a mint. His
coffee was good and his crazy advertising jingle on the radio was even  
better.
"Better coffee a billionaire's money can't buy.' I can still hum it if you want.
Today, Chock full o 'Nuts is owned by a large corporation. They dare not
change the weird name, but they have begun opening what they call Chock
stores. I believe this is an error. Once a brand is established, any attempt to
mess with the name reminds the world just how weird the name is. Not good
marketing.
The Chock full o'Nuts story contains another germ of truth, too. By
concentrating on selling coffee, its founder presumably ran down his  
shelled-
nuts business. If you want to buy shelled nuts (why?) today in New York
City, you don't automatically think of Chock full o'Nuts.
Strangling your own baby, in order to grow, is far more common than
you might think. If you have a successful monthly magazine, for instance,
and then launch a weekly in the same category, you will inevitably weaken
sales of your original tide. This will follow as surely as night follows day. So
should you launch the weekly magazine?Yes! A thousand times yes! Why? Because if you do not launch the weekly
edition, even though you know it is a good idea, then your rivals will do it
for you. You will then be left with a damaged monthly and no weekly. This
is called the 'Barbarians at the Gate' principle.
Let's imagine you have a herd of sacred cows inside a fortress. The barbar-
ians are at the gate and you are under siege. Killing sacred cows is a horrible
crime, even though your defenders are running short of food. If the barbar-
ians overrun the fortress, the sacred cows will die anyway. If you kill some of
the cows, you will be stronger and possibly able to turn back the barbarian
attack. Ergo, you eat one or two sacred cows - even if those same cows were
the meaning of life last week. Learning to evolve or die is a cardinal virtue.
This same argument has been used for centuries, both in commerce and
in politics. Recently, the growth of the internet has begun to destroy the
music industry. More and more people download songs without paying for
them, despite it being illegal. As a result, CD sales have been in tailspin and
record companies have watched in horror as billions of dollars have been
sucked out of the market, crippling their share price.
These record companies, who have grown fat for years by charging very
high prices for little bits of cheap plastic, reacted foolishly, at first. They were
far too slow to begin devouring the sacred cow of the CD. What they wanted
was for the pirating and illegal downloading to stop. That's where they
concentrated their efforts. Dumb move. The barbarians were not about to
quit any time soon.
After all, what the record companies were faced with was nothing new. It
was merely a kind of forced diversification. What they should have been busy
doing, since the creation of the Napster website, let alone Apple's iPod, was
weaving themselves new baskets - not defending the old, worn-out basket.
Today, as a result of commercial pressure, that is exactly their strategy.
Let's not be too hard on them. As you will discover when you start your
own business, it's difficult and scary facing up to swiftly changing realities on
the ground. Most of us would prefer that things stayed the same so that we
can carry on making money in ways we have grown comfortable with.
But things do not stay the same. Either you learn to go with the flow and
change as rapidly as you are able, or you will be left stranded, like the last
dinosaur, by the last warm take, on the last continent the ice age has yet to teach.
Let's take another example of building more baskets just as quickly asyou can. Richard Branson has done it. Some of his Virgin enterprises are not
as strong as others (did you ever try Virgin Cola?), but that's not the point.
Western capitalism will have to sink into an ocean of darkness before all of
Richard's Virgin businesses go broke.
He has built scores of baskets, ranging from financial services to airlines,
from music super-stores to railway passenger services. He's a canny man. I
know from experience. I used to wake him up occasionally on his longboat,
moored in central London. Before I even got a mouthiful of coffee for break-
fast, I was answering his damn telephones, ringing off the hook while he
showered. In those days, he was probably showering in his trademark jumper.
Richard has perfected one cardinal rule: he owns or part-owns more baskets
than almost anyone alive. It's certainly one way to become a billionaire.
How many baskets should you go for? As many as make sense. In the
beginning, it would be best, if you can, to keep them related to your core
business. Just like Richard did. He started off importing 'grey' record
albums from the USA - they were the illegal downloads of their time, except
they weren't tree. Richard followed up with record stores and then a record
company. Or was it the other way around? No matter. Different apples. But
basically all from the same orchard.
You will not have to be as exceptional as Richard Branson to get rich. But
his policy is a good one. No, a great one. I've failed the basket test a few
times, and perhaps I should confess to one or two of them.
O When I had the chance (i.e. when flush with cash), I should have bought
more magazines. Even a newspaper, if I could have afforded it. Local
newspapers, until recently, made a ton of money from their classified ads,
I missed a trick there.
O I should have considered going into radio or television production earlier
than I did. Many popular television shows are based loosely on a 'maga-
zine' format. There are a lot of similarities in the boys and girls who
create television and create magazines. Not to mention the content.
O I should have invested in one or two internet start-ups I knew were going
to do well. That was a stupid error and came about because, by then, I
was spending too much time each day writing poetry. No excuse, though.
There would be other tricks I missed, if I could bring myself to evaluate
them. But nobody likes to dwell on past failures. They're just too painful.Of course, not all baskets are worth investing in. Dennis Publishing did
a great job as far as the internet was concerned. While most of the big maga-
zine companies in the world were pouring cash into massive internet expan-
sion seven or eight years ago, we decided to back off.
The sums being bandied about were insane. One British publishing
company I know planned to invest $50 million over a couple of years on
their internet business, housed in some massive building to give them room
to expand. (It never did expand. It sank.) This strategy was executed solely
to assuage institutional investors. Who knew nothing about the current state
of play on the internet. Naturally.
Dennis Publishing built its websites carefully and well. We stuffed them
with content and we advertised them in the pages of our magazines. But we
didn't allow ourselves to be suckered into weaving a basket the size of the
Super Bowl which would be obsolescent before it returned a penny. We
couldn't afford to.
This sensible policy was mainly the result of Guy Sneesby, who still works
for me. Despite loving the internet and everything about it, he was dead
against throwing money at it. 'Wait until it grows. Match investment with
growth. Make it pay,' was his game plan. Turned out he was right. Probably
saved me $10 million or so. Maybe more. Thanks, Guy. (You see, it pays to
hire talent smarter than you are.)
Meanwhile, on the other side of the Atlantic, Guy's counterpart in my
company there was a long-time Dennis staffer, a British ex-pat called Roger
Munford. Roger has never been known to waste a buck. He's naturally thrifty.
His second name is 'Frugal'. I have always suspected that when Roger's coffee
from Starbucks goes cold, he warms it up in the microwave. More than  
once!
Roger was running Dennis's American internet division, and his instinct
was similar to Guy's. But he spotted that things were different over there.
Most magazines sell more copies via a paid subscription than on the news-
stand in America - quite the opposite situation a publisher is faced with in
Britain and Europe. Obtaining paid magazine subscriptions is a costly busi-
ness. On average, it can cost between fifty and one hundred dollars to obtain
a 'live' subscriber - one who will eventually renew their subscription and pay
off the cost of having attempted to acquire scores of others.
Still with me? So Roger goes into overdrive when he finds he can sell
subscriptions on the Maxim website. This strategy isn't working for Guy in
the UK, but who cares? It's working in the USA. So Roger, that thrifty,frugal soul, begins pouring hundreds of thousands of dollars of my money
into our American internet operation, weaving a massive new basket we
never knew existed.
It must have been painful for him, but it paid off. We were selling
subscriptions for pennies instead of fifty or sixty bucks a time. Hundreds of
thousands of bloody subscriptions. It was exciting, it made great sense, and
it allowed us to build the Maxim website into one of the most powerful
internet portals for young men in North America.
And the beauty was, the newsstand purchasers of the ink-on-paper
version of Maxim had paid for it. They had provided the cash to invest in  
our
website. Thanks, Roger. (You see, it pays to hire talent smarter than you  
are.)
Just remember that this advice is not designed for your start-up phase.
During the start-up, you concentrate on that one basket as if your life (and
the life of your first-born) depends upon it. But once you have something
that's working and making some money, start looking around quickly for
another opportunity. The more baskets the better.
Diversifying not only ensured that I had more chances to lay eggs and
somewhere to incubate them, it also gave me the confidence to concentrate
on any one egg at any one time. When one of my projects was in trouble  
and
needed more work, or needed rethinking, the fact that I had other eggs in
other baskets gave me the confidence to do what was right. Like re-engi-
neering or folding it.
One of the problems with being a start-up entrepreneur is that you tend
to think of what you have created as some kind of surrogate child. It  
becomes
your 'baby', if you're not careful. This is dangerous and counter-productive.
You are not in the egg-laying and basket-weaving or baby business. You are
in the business of getting rich.
If you have only one set of eggs in one basket, then selling it (let alone
folding it), can be surprisingly hard. The thought of letting go because it's
just not working may be more than you can bear, however logical such a
decision is. By having other eggs doing well in other baskets, you ensure  
that
you can approach such problems at least semi-dispassionately. (It will only  
be'semi'; trust me.)
It's for this reason that I am often, along with my group CFO, Ian
Leggett, the only one voting to close down one project or another at my
various companies. To the young people involved in that project, it is a
matter, seemingly, of life or death. To a man with many other fish to fry, it
is just another problem in need of a solution.
The reverse of that medal, of course, is that I do not bring to any proj-
ect the passion and insight of those more closely involved. Even so, by  
diver-
sifying and building other baskets in other countries, I believe I have become
better able to make hard decisions more often. That's a definite plus.
The biggest basket I ever built wasn't my first or second. It was my twen-
tieth. But if I hadn't built the second, I would never have reached the twen-
tieth. And maybe, just maybe, I have a couple more baskets yet to build.
LISTEN AND LEARN
Then the Gods of the Market tumbled, and their smooth-tongued
wizards withdrew.
And the hearts of the meanest were humbled and began to believe it was true,
That All is not Gold that Glitters, and Two and Two make four-
Ana the Gods of the Copybook Headings limped up to explain it once more.
RUDYAKD KIPLING, 'THE GODS OF THE COPYBOOK HEADINGS'
A lot of strangers ask to come and see me during the course of a year. And I
mean a lot. I have three highly trained, full-time personal assistants at my
private offices just handling the calls. In fact, they share another assistant
who answers the phones - a kind of assistant to the assistants.
You might think that's excessive or just showing off. But if you were
there in the middle of a busy day, you'd revise your opinion. The only
description that comes close is organised chaos. Pretty often I find myself in
two meetings at once. Which is why I have a connecting set of stairs to my
flat upstairs from the offices. There just aren't enough meeting rooms, and
a kitchen table always makes for a friendly substitute.
Not for me the quiet executive office floor with minions toiling their
nuts off down below while I smoke huge cigars and ready myself for a  
sooth-ing massage. I want to be where people can reach me on certain days of the
week. Why? Because I want to hear what they have to say.
That's not because I'm a sociable chap. In fact, there's little I like better
than my own company. But when you stop listening, you stop learning. And
if you stop learning, it's time to get out of the kitchen and let someone else
do the cooking.
Listening is the most powerful weapon after self-belief and persistence
you can bring into play as an entrepreneur. And yet I'm familiar with  
numer-
ous senior executives running large companies who might spend two or
three weeks in between listening to a 'stranger' - or a 'minion'.
Talking to your own executives and senior managers is necessary, of
course. But talking to people you do not know, or who work in some
obscure corner of your industry (or even in your own company), is just as
necessary. More so, perhaps.
If you have experience, a little investment cash and will make the time,
then the world will bring to your door an amazing collection of visionaries,
con artists, madmen and budding entrepreneurs. They all have something to
say. Most of your time will be wasted. But what is not wasted will make you
richer. Much richer.
A digression. Allow me to slip in here a few words concerning courtesy.
I cannot give it a chapter or even a subheading to itself, because being cour-
teous and always failing merely makes you a courteous loser. Courtesy is  
not
a cardinal virtue in getting rich, I admit. But it helps. It works. It greases
wheels where force will not prevail. Out of the mouth of anyone on their  
way
to becoming rich, it lends a certain gravitas and creates the impression of
someone you might like to do business with. This is true in any country in
the world, in my experience, but it is especially true in the USA. Americans
worship courtesy almost as much as they worship money.
But the courtesy of listening is not an excuse for inaction. Unfortunately,
this is often the very use to which it is put. How virtuous we all feel listen-
ing, taking notes, interjecting our own two-penny-worth and promising to
consider the matter and get back to whoever has come to visit. Trouble is,
business is not a talking shop. It relies on decisions, often hard decisions,
being made in as short a time as makes sense.
My advice, based on thousands of such meetings over the years, is tokeep them short - unless your gut tells you that you have stumbled upon a
winner. Set the meeting for twenty minutes. Have somebody interrupt you
after twenty-five minutes and usher the caller swiftly from your room.
It's usually better to leave no doubt in your visitor's mind if you're not
interested in their project or idea. In a way, it's kinder, as well. While the
temptation is to say, 'I'll confer with my colleagues and get back to you,' this
will eventually come back to haunt you and waste more of your most valu-
able resource. Time.
I'm feeble at this balance between courtesy and efficiency and always
have been, but I've got a little better over the years - especially with the help
of my personal assistants, Wendy, Caroline and Amy. They're trained to
interrupt me if they sense either my visitor or I is flying on autopilot. And
they can be ruthless about it!
Piling up meeting upon meeting in a brutal schedule actually helps. Your
visitor sees others waiting to see you and will procrastinate less. If you do
need time to mull over a suggestion, then make it clear that it will be you
getting back to them. People with an idea are desperate, and will call and call
and call unless you set clear ground rules.
Now let's talk about ideas and who owns what. If someone comes to see
you with an idea you're already considering or are already working on (no
matter how loose the connection), then stop them, abruptly and tell them the
situation. That's only fair. It is curiously common for new ideas to arrive
independently from more than one source at a time. Science can't explain it,
and neither can I, but it's a fact, all the same.
Ideas, by the way, cannot be 'owned' by anyone. You cannot trademark
or patent or copyright any idea. You can only protect the execution of the idea
and trademark the name. This is an important thing to know in any business
and is often misunderstood by people who come to you with an idea. Such
people often request you sign an NDA (a Non-Disclosure Agreement), and I
am usually happy to do so.
Why? Because the force in law of most NDAs is [united and they do not
work in the way most people think they do.
For example, the idea for 3M's Post-it Note could be described as
follows: Taper of any size, one edge of which which will attach itself by way
of gum to most surfaces, especially paper, and which can be detached, with-
out leaving a residue or mark.' A lawyer would shorten that to 'paper with a
repositionable adhesive'. No matter. If you had tried taking that description
to the patent office after 3M's research scientist, Dr Spencer Silver, discov-ered the adhesive but before Art Fry, a 3M new-product researcher, hit upon
a use for it - it would have availed you nothing. Why?
Because 3M owned the formula for the gum. The formula was a way of
executing the idea. If you had come up with an even better gum and had
created your own name for such notes and marketed them, then 3M would
have had a devil of a job to stop you, because no one can copyright or patent
an idea. You can only protect the execution of the idea, which must be unique.
If your gum really was unique, you would be in business. And what a business!
Similarly, the Walt Disney Corporation does not own the rights to all
imaginary talking mice. Talking animals existed in the minds of writers and
artists long before Walt Disney himself was born. The Disney Corporation
only owns the 'look and feel' (and a host of other attributes) of two partic-
ular talking mice, Mickey and Minnie Mouse. If you are in the business of
executing ideas to make money, then this is something you are going to have
to come to grips with and become a minor expert on. There are many books
to help you out there.
To get back to our meetings where people are attempting to persuade you
to consider their idea or project: what about ideas put forward by a member
of your own staff? What if they come up with an idea which the company then
develops and which proves to be a huge success. Who owns it?
The answer is that the company does. You do, if you are the owner of the
company and your employee put forward the idea in the course of working
for you. (Now do you see why you must always hire people more talented
than you?) The only exception to this would be if an agreement had been
entered into between you and your employee, or between the company and
its employee, or if the idea had nothing to do with your industry and had
been conceived (and developed) in the employee's own time, using no
company materials.
Other than that, in the ordinary course of business, you do not owe your
employee a single cent for bringing his or her idea forward. That's especially true
if your money, or your company's money, was used to test and develop the idea.
This seems unfair. It was her idea. She pushed it forward and probably
worked very hard on it. Shouldn't she enjoy some of the financial benefits of
her idea? We'll get back to that, but first let's look at another scenario. The
non-employee who comes in with a thumping great idea and wants you and
your company to help execute it.This is a different kettle of  fish. You must proceed cautiously. Just
because NDA agreements usually have little force, doesn't mean you can be
cavalier and reckless. How far has this person gone towards executing the
idea? If she came to see you and said, 'I have an idea for a coloured note that
can be stuck onto paper, that you can write on, and that can be removed later
without leaving a mark,' then she is a fool. She should not have come to you
without protecting that idea very, very carefully indeed.
However, if she then brought out a sample that did not work very well,
but which worked to some degree, the case is altered. She has executed her
idea, however badly. If you wish to invest in the idea, you would almost
certainly have to come to a legal agreement with the inventor.
This all sounds hypothetical and theoretical. But it's not, you know. In
more situations than you might imagine, it becomes critical. Ownership is
all. When who owns what is in dispute, the only people who are going to get
rich are the lawyers. There have been many, many bitterly contested owner-
ship disputes in business which not only wrecked the companies involved,
but destroyed the sanity of the main participants. The invention of the tele-
vision set in America was one such.
But what of the young lady who works for your company and brought
you (or her manager), the great idea that worked so well? What of her?
That's up to you, buddy. You're the owner. If you're a sensible, decent,
worthwhile human being, you will reward her handsomely and promote her.
And you will thank her publicly.
If you're a rotten, ingrate scumbag, without any decent feelings what-
ever, you will not reward her. And you'll get rich. But perhaps not quite as
rich as a more enlightened owner. Because if your clever employee has had
one such great idea, she may well have another later. And she is unlikely to
stay working for a company that stiffed her so badly, or to hand them
another gem, is she?
I'm fully aware that this isn't a book about becoming a worthwhile
human being. As I keep attempting to drum into you, riches aren't particu-
larly worthwhile in themselves in any case. They don't make anyone a better
person, at least as far as I have seen. But listening continuously, listening and
learning, is one of the vital components for those of you who wish to be  
rich.
What you choose to do with your loot is up to you.
But listen and learn if you want to be rich! 1 0A FEW WORDS
ABOUT LUCK
Born under a bad sign
I been down since I began to crawl
If it wasn't for bad luck,
I wouldn't have no luck at all.
BOOKER. T. JONES AND WILLIAM BELL, 'BORN UNDER A BAD SIGN'
THE INVINCIBLE WORM OF DOUBT
Army chaplains who have seen bullets fly, sometimes boast that 'there are no
atheists in the foxholes'. In the same way, as bullets fly around our head in
life, most of us are believers in luck. Secret believers for the most part, it's
true. But believers none the less.
The major religions of the world have worked tirelessly over the centuries
to eradicate 'superstitions' among their flock; 'superstitions' which appear to
mock, or at least to be at odds with, 'holy' writ. Which is another word for
supernatural dogma. In this, they are at one (just for once) with philosophers
and scientists, although for very different reasons. And it is true that a great
many ancient superstitions no longer hold very much sway in large parts of
the world. But with 'luck', and with omens of good or evil fortune, scien-
tists, philosophers, religious leaders and wise men have, for the most part,
laboured in vain.
You think not? How many times have you 'knocked on wood', perhaps
rising from your chair to find a piece of wood to knock upon, or even tapped
your head in a self-deprecating nod to the pagan gods of fortune? Many
times, I would wager. I do it myself, and so do most people I know, however
sheepishly.
We are all in thrall to Lady Luck, and therefore to superstition. Even
those of us who rolled our eyes in disbelief when we heard that Nancy
Reagan insisted on consulting an astrologer before allowing her husband,
the most powerful man in the world at that time, to sign a disarmament
agreement with the Russians. Even those of us who roared with laughter
recently when yet more revelations emerged of odd and arcane behaviour
involving the use of 'healing crystals' at No. 10 Downing Street. Not that
the crystals were the half of it.We may mock Mrs Blair and Mrs Reagan all we like, but this invincible
worm of doubt, this nagging feeling that some are born to win and some are
born to lose, that we can perhaps propitiate Fortune with ritual or prayer or
sacrifice - this deathless wriggler infests most of us, to one degree or  
another.
So what can we do about it on our quest to get rich?
The truthful answer, of course, is nothing. We can do nothing at all. And
every word I now type opens me to well-deserved mockery and contempt
from those very few souls (a Freudian slip, that last word, I'm afraid), who
steadfastly deny the existence of any such thing as luck. Or destiny. Or the
gods of good fortune.
And yet, and yet ... Just like you, I have seen it at work. I have watched
my own idiocy transformed by a piece of good fortune. I have stood,  
amazed,
as catastrophe transformed itself into another chance - or, even more ridicu-
lously, into a home run. And I have witnessed genuine achievement and hard
work undone by a series of astonishingly unlikely events - mostly in others, I
hasten to add. (I have just realised that those last seven words were a nod to
the gods of good fortune. I shall leave them there as a penance.)
Then there is negative luck, or luck disguised. When I was thinking small
and acting big in the late 1980s, I collapsed at my cottage in Connecticut.
It later transpired that I had contracted legionnaire's disease in a hotel in
Los Angeles.
Legionnaire's, caused by the bacterium Legionella pneumophila,, which
breeds in the air-conditioning units of hotels, hospitals and other large build-
ings, is a killer. It is especially lethal to coked-up, overweight, cigarette-
smoking, malt-whisky-swilling idiots with too much money who believe they
are built of titanium.
After the plane had touched down in New York, I insisted that my chauf-
feur drive me straight to the cottage, despite his appeals to take me to a
hospital closer to the airport. My real reason was that I had a girlfriend wait-
ing at the cottage and I knew she would be frightened to spend the night
there alone. She was also a very beautiful girl - even when men are dying
they think of sex! Little did I know that sex would be off the menu for the
next few months.
That irrational decision, made in severe pain and through waves of
nausea, saved my life. It was lucky, although I didn't feel too lucky at the
time. It was luck disguised.Hospitals in Connecticut have 24-hour diagnosticians on duty.
Connecticut is one of the richest states, per capita, in the union and the
emergency wards of their hospitals in no way resemble the scrum and chaos
of many an inner-city hospital in large cities nearby. Within minutes of being
rushed to Danbury Hospital by my cottage neighbour (more luck: he was a
pharmacist and knew a potentially lethal fever when he saw one), the diag-
nostician there made a brave and, as it turned out, correct diagnosis.
If I had taken my chauffeur's advice, it might have been hours, even days,
before a harassed and frantic A&E doctor in a New York City hospital finally
diagnosed a set of bewildering and very rare symptoms. By then, of course,
I would have slipped into a pulmonary coma from which there could have
been no return.
That disease was also double luck disguised for me. It forced me to
change my way of life. I came so very close to death that it jolted me back
to reality. How close? Close enough for the doctors to ask what my religion
was. Did I want to see a minister or a priest?
I am proud to report that, lying there on a bed of ice hooked up to more
tubes than you'd find in a sack of spaghetti, I managed a weak joke through
gritted teeth, which raised a laugh from a pretty nurse. She was thoughtfully
pouring ice water on my genitals to keep me awake at the time. 'No minis-
ter or priest, thank you, doc. But do you have a venture capitalist handy?'
Let's return to the altogether happier world of making money and
disguised luck. I once made several million pounds through a piece of luck
that was also pretty heavily disguised at the time. Back in 1990, things were
going well at my British company. Or so we all thought. I was busy with my
partners in America building a brand new beast that needn't concern us here.
The UK company had expanded so fast we were operating out of five
separate locations in an area of central London called Fitzrovia. This was
obviously an inefficient state of affairs. The managing director of Dennis
Publishing at that time was a fully qualified accountant who had once been
our finance director.
Lesson No. 1: Never make your finance director or CFO the MD or
president of anything!
Secure in the knowledge that our finances were in good order and we
were making a decent profit, I asked my MD (we will call him Christopher,
although that is not his real name) to scout around for a new headquartersbuilding in Fitzrovia. He found one. An absolute beauty. We could not
afford to buy it, of course, but we could certainly afford the rent because of
all the savings we would make by working together under one roof.
Negotiations commenced and were concluded on Christmas Eve, I was
already on vacation in the Caribbean with a gaggle of girlfriends, inhabiting
several hotel suites and villas.
Lesson No. 2: Never go on vacation when a deal is going down.
I was so proud of our new headquarters building that I actually took a
photograph of it with me on holiday. It was called Chadwickham House and
still stands today in Bolsover Street, London. It's an odd but elegant struc-
ture, which might be described by a cockney lad as 'all mouth and no
trousers'. That is, it's more show than substance. But what a show!
The frontage of Chadwickham House is immense, guarded by imposing
wrought-iron railings. It features numerous stone gargoyles on pillars and
literally scores of panelled windows. The entrance portico is handsome and
austere. Unfortunately, the building had very little depth. But who cared? It
absolutely looked the business and was more than big enough for us.
Then came a fateful telephone call. My vacation was wrecked.
Christopher had been so busy as managing director he had not been watch-
ing our accounts closely enough. Far from making a big fat profit, Dennis
Publishing UK had barely broken even that year. A black hole had appeared
in our annual accounts and we had been living in a fool's paradise. There  
was
absolutely no impropriety or shady dealings going on. It was just faulty
accounting, exacerbated by a change in our computer accounts package.
Lesson No. 3: When you change accounting systems (or accountants, for
that matter), have the numbers checked over and over again. I'll eat my hat
if errors are not discovered in the next iteration.
Looking back, I suspect Christopher shouldered a great deal of the
blame that belonged to others. But that is what MDs and presidents and
CEOs are paid for. If it happens on their watch, then they must bear the
responsibility. To his credit, Christopher did just that, although I suspect he
aged a year during the crisis.
Desperately we attempted to back out of the Chadwickham House deal.
No dice. There was no escape clause. I flew back to London and underwrote
a loan at a very nasty rate of interest. That was foolish. By this stage in my
life I should not have been personally underwriting business loans.Lesson No. 4: Never personally underwrite business loans for your
company unless you absolutely, positively, are forced to. Even then, set  
limits
in the agreement so that, as the loan figure is reduced over time, you are
released from your undertakings commensurately.
Dennis Publishing moved into its fancy new headquarters. We were happy
with them, but remained as poor as church mice for a few months.
Christopher was offered a new job by a rival publisher based in America. He
took it and still resides today on the west coast of America; very happily, I
might add. I appointed a new MD and a new finance director. Life moved  
on.
A while later, my partners and I made a killing in America and I found
myself awash with cash. Tens of millions of pounds of cash. Naturally I set
about spending it just as fast as was humanly possible, which, in my case,
must have set some kind of world record.
New cars, new houses, new women and new wine cellars. But I'm not a
complete fool and my new finance director, Ian Leggett, proved to be a gem.
He forced me to invest in a few sensible things apart from the company itself,
One of them was Chadwickham House. I bought the property from the land-
lords for a song and sold it six or seven years later, when we moved to an  
even
larger office block. The profit was handsome. Very handsome indeed.
Lesson No. 5: Listen to people who are good with money and always
invest in property with a good address - providing you can pay cash for it
and will not need to sell it for a few years.
So where did the negative, disguised luck come in? It came in the shape
of the black hole in the 1990 company figures. Think about it.
If we had known the truth, I would never have entered into a lease for a
fancy new building. I would then not have been in a position, as a tenant, to
purchase it from the landlords. After all, I'm not in the property business.
Furthermore, we would not have been in a position to squeeze a sensational
price from the property developer who subsequently bought it from me. (He
was forced to pay above the odds because Ian discovered that Chaduickham
House was slap bang in the middle of a city block the developer had been
acquiring site by site.)
It wasn't a clever business brain that made me all that money. It was
dumb luck. But I was ready to seize the opportunity that disguised luck
had delivered.One of my favourite philosophers, the first-century Roman Seneca,
coined the following: 'Luck is what happens when preparation meets
opportunity.' I have never come across a better definition - that's why I'm
repeating it. Preparation multiplied by opportunity. Say it again. Learn it off
by heart. Let it become a daily mantra. Luck is preparation multiplied by
opportunity.
Over the centuries this has morphed into cracker-barrel soundbites, as in
the golfer Gary Player's: 'It's a funny thing, luck. The harder I practised, the
luckier I got.' But the original is far more profound and Seneca's quote is
worth a moment of our time. Preparation is the key. Be prepared. Do the
heavy lifting and the homework in advance. Get on with the job, but remain
alert enough to spot an opportunity when it arrives. Then hammer it.
If you haven't prepared yourself, the opportunity will go begging. It will
be yet another regret in your life, another 'if only ...' And even if you have
prepared, but are too busy, probably buried in the minutiae of management,
or a messy divorce, or moving house, or a hundred and one other things,  
then
luck will again evade you. Months or years later you will be saying, 'If only I
had spotted that opportunity. I was ready for it, but I wasn't paying attention.'
'If only...' are the two saddest words in the English language.
Then there is the case of a man I have known for thirty years. He is a
better publisher than I am and has been a better publisher since we both set
out on our own back in the early 1970s. He is a better businessman, too. He
networks more and is always one of the first to understand which way the
wind is blowing. His writing skills are way above my own - not that that's
saying much, I know. But even so, good writing skills can be important in
our business.
He listens to others more often and more closely. He is a fierce but fair
negotiator and has more patience than I. And, by God, he has needed more
patience, more patience than Job.
Like a modern-day version of that tormented biblical figure, misfortune
dogs him. No sooner has he struck gold than it crumbles into dross. No
sooner has he dug another mine than it fills with water nobody guessed was
there. Nothing will work. Nothing has ever really worked for him. It must
be absolutely galling.
His personality has changed for the worse in recent years. He now
exhibits, perhaps not unnaturally, a degree of resentment towards those  
whohave done so much better with so much less talent and less determination. I
notice I have begun to avoid his company. And so have others.
Is it because I feel guilty? Is it because I wish to avoid his flashes of bitter-
ness and dark humour? Is it because I am leery of vile, involuntary gloating?
Or is it because in some pagan corner of my heart, I believe that bad luck
might be contagious?
I don't know the answer to that. But I do know that he ought to be rich.
At least as rich as I am, and perhaps a great deal richer. So what is it that  
sepa-
rates us? Perhaps a dispassionate analysis will help to us to peer dimly into  
the
murky world of what we humans call 'luck' and 'misfortune'.
THE NATURE OF ALBERT'S MISFORTUNE
You will find a great deal of poetry in this book. Both by me and by much
better poets. There's a good reason for that. Poetry forces a writer to
condense and crystallise his thoughts and often represents a short cut to
truths unsuspected by the author himself. Here's a short poem I wrote a
while ago concerning the laws of unintended circumstance and 'luck'.
Two Left Feet
The laws of unintended consequence
Have nimble limbs; they mesmerise the dance.
With two left feet, our dancing makes no sense:
Are not all ballerinas born by chance?
Perhaps- But I shall tell what I have learned-
The gods of fortune recognise no debt;
Bouquets strewn on a stage are mostly earned,
And luck is one more dividend of sweat.
But is luck just 'a dividend of sweat'? How many times can one person 'dust
themselves down, pick themselves up and start all over again' before they
lose heart? I have already mentioned Winston Churchill's 'If you're going
through hell, keep going'. All very well if you are a cigar-smoking, ageing
hero at the nadir of his career, who is nevertheless certain he is destined forgreatness. But what about the rest of us?
The only truth about luck, good or bad, is that it will change. The law
of averages virtually guarantees it. And here, I think, is one difference that
separates me from my 'unlucky' friend, whom I shall eall Albert.
Albert is so close to the cross currents of the market that his antennae lead
him astray. When he hits yet another bump on the road, or has a head-on colli-
sion, he attempts to change his luck by changing direction. It's not that he
lacks stamina. Albert has tons of energy and stamina. But he doesn't, as
Churchill put it, 'keep going'. Instead, he keeps looking for pastures new - the
golden sunlit uplands, the philosopher Leibniz's 'best of all possible worlds'.
Perhaps there, in a new place, he will find his fortune and change his luck?
Instead, he immediately encounters the evils of an unfamiliar and
perilous country, without the benefit of the road maps he so painstakingly
put together in his last adventure. He does not 'keep on truckin" as the
cartoonist, Robert Crumb, would have it.
This 'flight not fight' behavioural trait is the sign of a prey animal, not a
predator. Despite what you will read in many self-improvement tomes, 'part-
nering' and 'symbiotic evolution' are no way to get rich. They may be a way
to a better world. They may make you a happier person and a better
manager. But they will not make you rich - except, perhaps, in spirit.
To become rich you must behave as a predator. I will go further, you
must become a predator. Albert is not a predator.
By moving so adroitly and so swiftly from one thing to the next, Albert
does not place himself in the way of luck. He does not draw luck to him. He
does not make his own luck. He is much too much in love with the green,
green grass just over the next hill.
Then again, Albert is more intelligent than I am. He had a grand educa-
tion and read all the right books at university. He is not a self-taught scholar,
as I am. But there is a downside to all this intelligence and imagination. He
thinks a little too much before he acts. He weighs the options too carefully.
He is capable of imagining defeat.,
So while he is clever enough to want to minimise his risk by switching to
yet another new and uncontested marketplace, he leads himself into uncer-
tainty. And into error.
Uncontested markets are usually uncontented for a reason. Nature
abhors a vacuum and if no one else is contesting a market, it may well be thatno such market exists. Albert is always slightly ahead of the media game. He
is a visionary, I guess. Very few visionaries get rich, begging the lads at
Google's pardon.
New software often faces this problem. Brilliant software designers come
up with fancy software that solves no known problem. They are forced to
discover or invent a problem their software might solve. Should they fail,
there will be no users and no investors. And no money.
Take electronic spreadsheets, for example, today one of the most ubiq-
uitous tools of any finance department anywhere in the world. Prior to the
invention of spreadsheets, nobody spent much time playing 'what if' games
and mapping possible alternative financial business models. Today, every-
body does it as a matter of course.
But few visions or new technologies result in such a serendipitous
outcome. Yet Albert wastes too much of his time seeking them out, coming
to understand them and making all the rest of us feel inferior as he wearily
explains this exciting new concept for the umpteenth rime to Luddite
chumps like me.There are other differences between Albert and me. He is a great believer
in partnering and share options and employee profit participation, I shall be
devoting an entire chapter to this subject (See Chapter 14; A Piece of the
Pie), but I will mention, here, that in Albert's case, this division of the spoils
is undertaken in the minutest detail, long before there are any profits what-
ever to share, Albert believes they encourage his co-workers. But such
arrangements are immensely time-consuming and a distraction from the
tunnel vision necessary to become rich in the first place.
Albert is a ferocious negotiator, as I've mentioned, and a whizz at assim-
ilating and mastering detail. But he is a perfectionist and his powers of dele-
gation are stunted. He's so good at what he does that he is unwilling to
accept even slightly second-best. This means, for him, that he must do it
himself. And if by chance he doesn't get it exactly right the first rime, then
he will do it over and over again until it is right. Until it is perfect.
We shall come to the importance of delegation later in this book (See
Chapter 13: The Joys of Delegation), but Albert's reluctance to permit
young managers to make their own mistakes has cost him dearly over the
years. Not just in the time wasted, but in management turnover.
While he is fair, and sometimes more than fair, with his staff, they don't
love him. They don't love him because they do not get the chance to grow,
and if there is one good thing about a well-managed company in a capitalist
society, it is the opportunity to groom talent and encourage it to grow. Apart
from the money, it's the best thing about getting rich.
As a result of trying to do everything himself, Albert also sometimes
misses out on good fortune and luck when it's staring him in the face. He
reminds me of a groom-to-be who is so keen to redecorate the church, the
reception rooms and his new house to ensure a perfect wedding day that he
fails to notice his bride-to-be has grown tired of waiting and has married
another man.
Also, Albert cares too much (because he is growing desperate in his mid-
fifties), and takes himself and his destiny too seriously. I know this because I
have got drunk with him a few times - always a good way to really get to
know somebody. In vain I have pointed out to him that we are nothing but
merchant princes. Who will give a hoot whether we made $10 million or
$500 million in a hundred years from now? Nobody will.
Having too much money isn't important. Breaking your neck is impor-
tant. Getting cancer is important. Having nothing to eat is important.
Losing someone you love is important. But too much money is absolutelynot important, it's just a part of the game. As H. L. Mencken put it: 'The
chief value of money lies in the tact that one lives in a world in which it is
overestimated.'
That's a fair summary. If we lived in a world where seaweed was overes-
timated, I would collect tons and tons of it. And I would enjoy doing it.  
But
I wouldn't kid myself it was all that important. It's just seaweed.
But Albert doesn't get it. He won't laugh at himself enough; he won't
dance in the moonlight stark naked at a party for the hell of it; he won't sing
the words to 'Duke of Earl' or 'Doo-Doo-Ron-Ron' out loud when we've
imbibed too much malt whisky - he doesn't even know the words to those
songs, for chrissake. He cares what people think about him. He cares about  
his
gravitas. He can't empty his mind during negotiations, stare straight through
an adversary and walk away from a table with millions of dollars piled on it.
How can I put this another way? Lady Luck doesn't love star-struck suit-
ors like Albert. She wants crazy bastards who will tell her to take a hike or
get lost if they feel like it. She won't come calling to anyone who needs her
or needs to worship her.
If Albert stopped trying to be lucky and just got on with the business of
making loads-a-money; if he ignored the rotten cow even when she came
calling; if he cursed her out loud for every little favour she bestowed ... then
who knows? She's a fickle bitch at best and making nicey-nicey is one  
certain
way never to get a piece of her.
Lastly, Albert has a penchant, and always did, for calling himself unlucky.
He's subtle in the way he does it, but he does it none the less. And he does
it too often for my taste. You do not have to read Norman Vincent Peale's
The Power of Positive Thinking to know that if you repeat something nega-
tive often enough, then you are training yourself in the ways of negativity.
The mask of misfortune Albert so ironically dons for the amusement of those
around him fits rather too well these days. He is becoming the mask. It's a
dangerous, stupid game and he ought to know better.
Maybe he does know better. But unless he gets lucky, he will never be rich.
No one can pretend that luck - or chance, at least - does not exist: in
life, in love, in business and in the getting of money. If you reject any notion
of the supernatural whatever, if you are a true atheist or a humanist with acapital 'H', then you must also accept that life itself on this planet arrived by
luck. You can't have it both ways.
'Fortune favours the brave,' says the old proverb. And that's right
enough. But it seems to especially scorn anyone who wants money too  
badly.
And it positively appears to despise men or women who fear to lose what
fortune they already have. As William Shakespeare put it in Othello:
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough,
But riches fineless* is as poor as winter
To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
My advice concerning luck is to laugh in the face of the Lady when she pres-
ents herself. Take what you will of her bounty and act swiftly to take advan-
tage of good fortune. But never thank her for it. And forget her the moment
she leaves to seek another victim.
In modern, sexist parlance: 'Treat her mean to keep her keen.' Pimp her,
don't court her. And don't go looking for her or make enquiries about her.
It isn't exactly the act of a gentleman, but then you didn't ask me to teach
you to be a gentleman.
You asked me to show you how to get rich.
So here are my last thoughts on this vexing and baffling phenomenon.
O Prepare yourself for luck, but don't seek her out. Let her come to you.
O Make your own luck.
O Don't whine or ever describe yourself as 'unlucky'. (You're alive, aren't
you?)
O Be bold. Be brave. Don't thank your lucky stars. The stars can't hear you.
O Stay the course. Stop looking for the green grass over the hill.
O  Don't try to do it all yourself. Delegate and teach others to delegate.
O  Remember that most predators are lucky most of their lives, unlike their
prey.
O Whiners and cowards die a hundred times a day. Be a hero to yourself.
O If being a hero isn't your style, then fake it. Reality will catch up eventually.
Q Just do it. It is much easier to apologise than to obtain permission.O Never take the quest for wealth seriously. It's just a game, chum.
O Next time you bump into Lady Luck, giver her a whack on the rump
from me.
O Be lucky. Get rich. Then give it all away. (We'll get to that bit later.)
O Don't call your son 'Albert'. (Just joking!)
 
* boundless, infinite1 1
THE ART OF
NEGOTIATING
The fortress that parleys is already half taken.
RUSSIAN PROVERB
THE BALANCE OF WEAKNESS
Reams of highfalutin nonsense have been spoken and published on the
subject of negotiating, especially by politicians. During John F, Kennedy's
portentous inaugural speech, the new president exhorted his fellow coun-
trymen: 'Let us never negotiate out of fear. But let us never fear to negoti-
ate.'
This is typically muddled drinking from one of the most overrated pres-
idents in US history, A good looker, but a bad egg.
If you 'negotiate out of fear' you are not 'negotiating'. You are surren-
dering in all but name. As to the second half of his pronouncement, he is
saying that it's always worth listening to the other side in the search for
mutually beneficial agreements. Did we need the world's most powerful man
to tell us that? It's just common sense.
Negotiating is a popular subject, too, in big fat books from US corpo-
rate management pundits with tides like The Art of the Steal OR The Sun Tzu
Split Second Manager. It's amusing stuff, but has little to do with getting
rich, except in the mind of  authors hoping to join the comfortably poor by
writing catchword tripe.
Serious negotiations, however, have everything to do with getting rich.
This is both because a great negotiator can make a real difference in some
situations and because many people, astonishingly, believe themselves to be
great negotiators. In my experience, the reality is somewhat more prosaic:
Q Most of us are rather poor negotiators.
O Most negotiations are unnecessary.
J 'The other side 1 is often just as smart (or stupid) as you are.
O In the end, 'the balance of weakness' almost always decides the issue.
O In Greed vs. Need, the former usually 'wins'.All negotiations arise from weakness, unless you are one of that strange tribe
who finds themselves intoxicated with the process of bargaining and negoti-
ating itself. Sure, haggling can be fun, but it's only a means to an end as far
as this book is concerned.
If you are overly fond of haggling, my advice is that you quit thinking
about making money the old-fashioned way and consider becoming a politi-
cian instead. That way you can rob and plunder your fellow citizens year  
after
year without risking your own financial security or capital - you bastard. (By
the way, please get used to people thinking of you as a bastard. After all, it's
what nearly everyone thinks of politicians, except themselves.)
As for us working stiffs, serious negotiating (just like turning to the law
to dig you out of trouble), should be reserved for serious occasions. Most
'negotiations' are not negotiations at all; they are merely part of the fabric of
everyday living. The manner in which they are conducted will depend on the
parties involved, the subject under discussion, your day-to-day management
style and what side of the bed you got out of that morning.
Take a small example. You have an employee who wishes to deposit and
collect their child from school each day. This will supposedly interfere with
his or her 'normal' working hours. Big deal.
If the employee is important to you, you will probably bend over back-
wards to 'negotiate' a solution. If they are not, you will probably enforce the
letter of the law applicable in the country or state in which you work, or
muddle through with your company's 'in-house rules'. (Personally, I'd 
allow
them to do it. But that's because I'm both an idle manager and a big  
old
softy - in personnel matters, at least.)
Whatever you decide to do, you are not involved in 'negotiating' - you
are problem solving. The same applies to mid-level salary negotiations, most
human-resource issues, job-title dickering, job-performance reviews and the
price of wet fish. Serious negotiations are like falling in love. You may have
fooled around a few times and been strongly attracted to one or two lovers.
But when you fall in love, brothers and sisters, you will know all about it.
Right off the bat. Boom! That's what serious negotiations are like. It's prob-
ably happened once or twice, right?
MANAGEMENT BARGAINING VS SERIOUS NEGOTIATIONSDo not mistake serious negotiations with management bargaining. They
require very different skills.
All great companies, all well-run organisations, need great managers and
great staff. That much, at least, is pretty obvious. You forget it at your peril.
But the acquisition of managers who can bring a sense of mission to even
mundane tasks, who can identify' potential candidates, nurture late bloomers,
fire dullards and whiners and adapt to changing circumstances - that search-
ing, identifying and nurturing is not about negotiating. It's about setting an
example of true meritocracy in a company where nepotism hasn't a chance
and where those who wish to succeed are given every opportunity and
encouragement to do so. So far, so straightforward.
Similarly, all organisations are a reflection of the people who start them.
This sounds crazy, but history has shown it to be true. The effects of even
long-dead founders often linger for decades. I'm told by Hollywood film
buffs, for example, that MGM movies in the old days were normally slightly
less 'dark' than Warner Bros movies. It was the 'house style', a style that had
filtered down from the original founders over the years and somehow
pervaded individual directors, producers and even actors at each studio.
The only 'style' I assume you're interested in developing is an efficient
money-making machine which is also a great place to work. That's a wise and
laudable aim, but however necessary, however laudable, such aims are, they
belong in the realm of senior- and middle-management problem-
solving.
Please remember: you are not reading this book to become a successful
manager. Managers rarely become rich. Most managers are lieutenants. 
You,
on the other hand, have to keep you eye on another ball - several other 
balls,
in fact.
You may well have to masquerade as a manager (for a short while) on the
way to becoming rich, and you should strive to be a good manager while 
the
role is forced upon you. But even if you discover that you truly have a 
talent
for the minutiae that management: demands, it's best to abandon the  
role
just as soon as you can afford to hire appropriate personnel.You just will not have the time to choose who gets to work in which
office, where the Christmas party should be held or what company  
policy
should be regarding the provision of in-house tea and coffee facilities. If, 
as
the owner, you do find you have the time to involve yourself in such 
deci-
sions, then I have news for you. Your organisation is in deep trouble.
Personally, I don't think I was a very good managing director or CEO of
any of my companies, so my advice concerning your choice of middle 
manage-
ment is limited to the following: the world is full of aspiring lieutenants. 
Most
people seek job security, job satisfaction and power over others far more 
than
they seek wealth. And thank goodness for that. If all the great managers 
in the
world were dead set on becoming rich, and willing to take the necessary 
risks
to do so, there would be little hope for the likes of you and me.
Management efficiency really does count, of course: loyalty counts, fair-
ness counts, a steady disposition counts, a sense of appropriate 
compromise
counts. An organisation will fail without managers who apply such 
virtues
consistently. But they are not necessarily attributes you should invite 
into the
room during a series of tough negotiations when the big money is on  
the
table and your future is on the line. They are the attributes of first-class
managers. Not negotiators.
Serious negotiations are very different from day-to-day bargaining and
should be approached differently. They imply a weakness in the position 
of at
least one of the parties involved in the negotiations, unlike day-to-day
bargaining, where no such weakness need exist. The first thing to be 
done,
perhaps the most vital thing, is to establish exactly where those 
weaknesses lie.Weaknesses in serious negotiations usually exist in both camps, of course,
at least to some degree or another, and it becomes important to swiftly
determine which weakness is most pressing and roost potentially  
catastrophic
to which party. An immediate balance of weaknesses may well prove more
decisive than any long-term balance of strengths.
It is for this reason that small companies and individuals have sometimes
managed to out-negotiate larger rivals, especially in emerging markets and
technologies. If a big, powerful organisation convinces itself it absolutely  
has
to have some whizzo new technology, or whatever, it will sometimes permit
itself to pay way over the odds for it. We've seen it a zillion times reported
in the financial press.
The balance of weakness is also the reason why farmers in Britain, for
example, are utterly in thrall to the power of the supermarket chains and why
British people pay more for much of their food than almost anywhere else in
Europe. British food isn't better (in fact, it is somewhat worse than in a
country such as France), but British supermarkets are undisputed champions
when it comes to exploiting the balance of weakness.
Farmers are poor negotiators. Supermarket chains are great negotiators.
Supermarkets have a lot of cash and many possible sources of supply.  
Farmers
need to fix that broken tractor and pay their veterinary bills right now. The
balance of weakness is overwhelmingly in the farmers' camp and the result is
therefore preordained unless central government interferes.
Supermarkets have a slight weakness - very slight. They need to buy food
regularly and in wholesale quantities. And they need quality and consistency.
If food became scarce, the balance would tilt and farmers would begin to
clobber the supermarkets. But, right now, farmers haven't a prayer. There is
too much food of reasonable quality too consistently available from too
many sources and our government has chosen not to interfere.
(The rights and wrongs of all this are immaterial. If I could arrange the
magazine publishing and internet website business the way British super-
markets have arranged their business, I would do it in a heartbeat.  
Providing
I was a supermarket and not a farmer.)
Or take the attitude of banks towards start-up or small companies. If you
need a loan because you cannot meet payroll, you almost certainly won't getone. (Er, make that 'you absolutely, definitely won't get one'.) The balance
of weakness is so obvious and utterly immediate, nobody will want to waste
time listening to your entreaties.
But if you need a loan, say, because you wish to take a private company
public with a reasonable chance of success in the not-too-distant future (in
other words, you don't really need a loan, it would merely be convenient to
be offered one), then loans will shower upon you like confetti. After all,
banks need to make money by selling professional services as well as charg-
ing interest, and you are now a potentially important customer, a customer
who may well require those professional services - not a supplicant grovel-
ling on his knees with a dog-eared business plan.
THE ELEPHANT AND THE FLEA
If all this sounds to you as if the controllers of capital are the 10 ton
elephants in the jungle, then you're right. But there is another side to it.
Your little outfit may be nothing but a flea in a corporate elephant's patch of
jungle, indeed one he has barely noticed until recently, but just how much
might the elephant be willing to pay to be rid of you, or to buy you out?
Especially if your business, however small, is growing and the elephant's
business is not?
Because the elephant has a master, a mahout. And his master is an unfor-
giving son-of-a-bitch with a nasty barbed iron stick and an elephant gun. He
is otherwise known as an institutional investor. All start-up entrepreneurs
should say their prayers for institutional investors, those fabulous beasts,
every night. 'Dear Lord, thank you, thank yon for institutional investors in
big companies.'
An institutional investor, often a pension or savings company, is just jargon
for an entity that owns a big chunk of stock in a publicly traded company.
So why? Why should you say your prayers for them? What do institutional
investors in huge corporations have to do with developing serious negotiating
skills as an entrepreneur and getting rich? Everything, my friend. Everything.
For the elephant must show his master that he is an up-to-date elephant.
A savvy elephant. An elephant that knows what's just round the corner and
what the next big thing is going to be in his patch of jungle. Otherwise he
risks his share price dropping and being hurt by the nasty iron stick, or even
shot by the fierce institutional investor, who will then acquire a  new
elephant, leaving the bones of the old one to rot on the jungle floor.NOW YOU have had an idea. You have nurtured it with your little company
and it is now a reality, however tiny. Better still, it looks like it's already  
work-
ing, or might work soon. The elephant is concerned that his master may hear
of this little flea's idea and that he might well be punished for not having
thought of it himself. (Most elephants are a trifle lazy, you know.) The
elephant knows what he must do then. He lumbers over to meet you. He
has done it many times before, with many other fleas.
Thus it is that the elephant comes to the flea - not because he wants to
(in his monstrous, corporate heart he would really like everything to stay
the same), but usually because he fears his mahout more than he despises
the flea. And sometimes, too, to be fair, because elephants are as curious as
the rest of us.
But never forget why he came calling in the first place. He does not love
you. He is not your friend, although he may pretend to be. He might not
hate you, he may even admire you a little. He will certainly flatter you. But
remember he had to come. His fear drove him. His fear of his master, the
institutional investor.
And the day when he does come - hurrah! - the day when he makes that
hateful call - hateful to him, that is - that is the day when the fun begins and
when serious negotiating skills and a dispassionate understanding of the
balance of weaknesses in your particular patch of jungle, at that particular
time, can change your life overnight. And can change it for ever. Just as it
changed mine.
Let's look at a couple of examples of the elephant coming to the flea. (Of
course, sometimes the flea must approach the elephant. Not so good. We'll
come to it later.)
THE ELEPHANT MISJUDGES HIS NEED
Are you sitting comfortably, children? Then I'll begin.
It is 1981. Personal computers are a new thing in the world. They are
not the everyday objects we now take for granted. They have little presence
inside the offices of any sensible company, large or small, except in those
companies helping to create them, or the software for them - and those very
few companies publishing specialist magazines about them.
Dennis Publishing Ltd is just such a small specialist magazine publishing
company, with a turnover of a few million pounds in Britain and a slippery
toehold in die USA. Its finances are precarious. Its owner is a  greedy littleflea, determined never to be sent back to prison and never to report to
another human being in his life.
The flea has managed to acquire a controlling interest in Europe's first
personal computer magazine from the man who launched it, Angelo  
Zgorelec.
The magazine is called Personal Computer World, or PCW for short. It is not
exactly a big magazine. Angelo and the flea have also helped to build up a 
series
of exhibitions allowing hardware and software manufacturers to show off  
their
latest products. All this helps to boost sales and credibility for PCW.
The flea's company has done its best to staff PCW with good editors and
writers. This is an easier task than usual, because there are so few rival maga-
zines. The magazine also has a first-class designer and one or two very
hungry advertising sales people. While it's not exactly living off the fat of  
the
land, PCW is an exciting place to work. The industry it reports on is a new,
exciting industry. There is a whiff of revolution in the air, a technological
revolution. PCW is right at the heart of it and the staff and owners know  
that
perfectly well.
Other magazine fleas have begun to take notice. They launch their own
personal computer magazines. But they do not invest in them sufficiently  
and
they are not quite as good as PCW. In time, the majority of them shut down
or wither on the vine. The flea redoubles his efforts to obtain cash by publish-
ing rubbish one-shot magazines about pop music and panda bears. He pours
this cash into PCW. Without question, this decision to invest is the second or
third most important business decision the flea will ever make in his life.
Above all, the flea and his magazine are swimming with the tide, not
against it, PCW is growing with the market. More readers come on board
every issue. And more advertising begins to arrive. A lot more advertising.
Angelo Zgorelec and the flea are both immensely proud of themselves.
Then disaster strikes. The flea has foolishly launched a pop-music weekly.
He has begun to believe he walks on water. This weekly is an initial success 
and
then a dreadful, cash-devouring failure. The flea is in panic and even  
entertains
the idea of selling half of his little company to friendly partners - 'whiteknights' they are called in business jargon. Fortunately, this deal falls through,
because his partners want him to close the pop-music weekly immediately and
the flea hasn't the courage or the wit to do so. When the 'white knights' walk
away, catastrophe stares the flea's company in the face. There is simply not
enough cash being generated to feed the growing monster called PCW.
The flea closes the pop-music weekly. He is forced to. By sheer, dumb luck,
his intransigence has kept him from selling half of his company's shares. But 
the
cash deficiency is looming still. And you must remember that the flea is still a
greedy littlc mite and wishes to become a millionaire at the earliest 
opportunity.
He is approached by a tall, affable man who, together with his sidekick,
has helped to build EMAP (East Midlands Allied Press), one of the biggest
magazine elephants in Britain. His name is David. David and the flea have
many meetings, later, David and his sidekick, Robin, will become good
friends with the flea. But this is not a time for friendship. This is a time for
serious negotiations.
David and Robin are a legend in the magazine jungle. They are polar
opposites in character and appearance. David is sophisticated, slim, very tall,
friendly and non -threatening. You can tell he went to university without  
even
asking. He would have made a first-class diplomat. He is wise in the ways of
prising properties from fleas. I think the first time I ever drank a decent
bottle of wine was with David.
Robin is cranky, hugely talented, sometimes bad-tempered; he does not
suffer fools gladly but he knows the magazine business backwards and is
immensely respected by the EMAP elephant employees. He has no time for
meals in restaurants and buttering up clients - or fleas for that matter, I don't
like him when I meet him. (I will get to like him very much in the years to
come.) David senses this and keeps Robin out of the picture.
David and the flea arm-wrestie over the possible sale of PCW to EMAP.
The flea speaks to tax advisors, to Angelo and to lawyers. He speaks to his
white-knight partners in America. The negotiations intensify and the flea
realises that David, while as calm as ever on the outside, is becoming anxious
to close the deal swiftly. There is a particular meeting in the flea's flat in
central London. Very, very nearly David persuades the flea that he must sell
PCW now; that he must shake hands on a price of £700,000 or thereabouts.
This is an astonishing price for a new magazine. And remember, the flea isvery, very greedy.
But just as dumb luck saved the flea before, instinct saves him now.
Instinct and the advice of the white knights and others. Besides, there is a
slightly glittery cast to the elephant manager's eyes the flea doesn't much
care for at this meeting. He asks for more, much to David's annoyance, and
this time, understandably, that annoyance is openly expressed.
For a few weeks, the flea wonders if he hasn't allowed his greed and
naivety to wreck his salvation. Perhaps he had pushed the elephant too far?
Certainly there are those around him who hold precisely that view. But what
has actually happened is that the EMAP elephant's managers have been talk-
ing to other fleas. They think they can obtain something rather similar to
PCW for less than the £1 million the flea is asking for.
Just for once, the EMAP elephant has misjudged the balance of weakness
and has underestimated his need. It is an error for which he will pay dearly
in the years to come. For within a short time, the flea will sell PCW, but not
for £700,000, not by a long chalk. What follows is the story of how he came
to sell it and how much for.
ANOTHER ELEPHANT COMES TO CALL
There is more than one elephant in any jungle. Which is just as well. Fleas
stand little chance when there is only one elephant - monopolies and entre-
preneurs don't get along.
Soon after the fateful meeting in the flea's flat with David, another
elephant comes to call. This is a Dutch elephant called VNU, with homes all
over Europe, It is a massive beast with a lot of experience in all kinds of
magazine publishing. In the UK, it has a large business-to-business opera-
tion, including magazines serving large, traditional, mini-computer and
mainframe computer departments.
The usual preamble and mating rites take place. The flea is coming to
enjoy lunches in fancy restaurants and bottles of good wine - especially when
he is not paying for them. But the flea has also learned to shrug off flattery
and keep his eye on the balance of weakness. This particular elephant has a
huge need, almost a unique need, and the flea is determined to exploit it.
The flea suspects that big computer installations will always be around.
But personal computers, desktop PCs as they will come to be known, are
the coming thing. They are a different kettle of fish entirely from main-
frames and systems that require men in white coats and machines the size
of a small room. The Dutch elephant's mahout will be especially angry ifthe old beast misses out on the coming thing, the desktop PC. That is his
unique weakness. And he is such a big elephant. And his mahout is such a
terribly fierce master.
Naturally the flea also has a weakness, one we already know about. He
/ *
is very short on cash and is greedy. Can the flea survive his cash shortfall and
curb his youthful greediness for long enough? Long enough for what, you
ask, children?
Long enough to make the Dutch elephant become truly, truly desperate.
Can he do it?
This is the flea's plan. His professional advisors hate the plan. It is stupid.
A flea cannot outwait an elephant! But it can, you know; for a little while it
can. And all the time the flea's magazine is swimming with the ride, grow-
ing bigger each issue and increasing its advertising revenues. The flea even
licenses an Australian edition of PCW to a young man who strolls into his
office while on vacation. (A young man who will subsequently become a
millionaire as a result.) All the while the market is growing. And the Dutch
elephant's mahout is not getting any happier.
The Dutch elephant's first offer is perfectly reasonable. It is made over
lunch by a very nice Dutchman called Francis. "We can offer you a million
pounds,' he says, peering over his spectacles. The flea stares him in the eye
and says nothing. 'And a little more. Say £200,000, which we will hold in
reserve and pay to you depending upon the performance of PCW over the
next year or so.'
This is a handsome offer. Almost twice the EMAP elephant's offer. But
the flea judges that the Dutch elephant is not desperate enough. Very
politely he declines and pours himself another glass of delicious wine.
Francis, wisely, let's the matter drop. He is an older man, and a skilled, cour-
teous negotiator.
Some weeks later, the Dutch elephant brings along another of his
managers. This one is British and his name is Graeme. The flea likes him
immediately. But he is careful to mask his likes and dislikes. These managers
are not here to be liked or not to be liked. They are here to negotiate and to
rob the flea if they can. That is what they are paid for, after all. That is what
their mahouts expect.
A big meeting is held in the Dutch elephant's palatial offices. The flea haswith him only his lawyer, called Michael. Prior to this meeting, the Dutch
elephant has tried to send an emissary to talk to Angelo Zgorelec, the minor-
ity shareholder in PCW. The flea is angry about that. There can only be one
negotiator. Any house divided is a house that will fall.
The flea has asked Angelo not to listen to the Dutch elephant's minions,
and Angelo has willingly agreed. The flea masks his anger at the meeting.
This is a big day. He knows it will not be the day, for the Dutch elephant is
still not desperate enough. But it's a big day, all the same.
The flea has warned his lawyer, Michael, to keep all their business papers
close to hand. To be ready for an abrupt and immediate departure. Michael
is unhappy about this. He is a canny, considerate man, and he is the flea's
friend. But he is not a negotiator and the flea is his client. He will do what
is asked of him. That's why he is a professional.
Around the table there are several managers from the Dutch elephant.
And maybe a lawyer or an accountant or two, it's difficult to tell. The meet-
ing begins and a new offer is made. The offer is almost exactly what the flea
has guessed it would be: nearly two million pounds, with a big chunk held
'in reserve'. It is a magnificent offer. Absolutely magnificent. Three times
what was offered by the EMAP elephant.
For a while the flea does not respond. Instead, he talks about how well
the magazine is doing, about the Australian edition, about the growth of the
exhibitions. He also mentions that he will be launching at least one more
personal computer magazine quite soon - one aimed at the personal
computer trade itself this time. At companies who sell personal computers
and personal computer software. It will be a business-to-business magazine,
precisely the type of magazine the Dutch elephant specialises in.
Eventually, the discussion comes back to the offer. The flea looks Graeme
and Francis in the eye. He totally ignores everyone else present. He empties
himself mentally and stares straight through them. He convinces himself that
he does not care what the outcome of these negotiations will be. He clings
to this illusion of emptiness while he negotiates. He doesn't care if he
becomes a millionaire or not.
'The price is three million pounds,' he says, 'and only one twelfth can be
held in reserve. That is the price and it will not be changed.'
There is consternation around the table, whether real or feigned it is
difficult to say. The flea nods to his lawyer, who collects his papers and puts
them in his briefcase. They both rise to leave. Just as they are leaving the fleastares once again at the two Dutch elephant managers, his mind and eyes as
blank as a zombie.
'Thank you for your offer, gentlemen,' he says. 'As I said, the price is
three million pounds with only a quarter of a million pounds held in escrow.
In addition, the buyer of Personal Computer World must permit me to launch
my new computer magazine to the trade. If I do not hear from you shortly,
then my next price will be four million pounds. Good afternoon.'
We walked out into the Soho sunshine and stopped at local cafe. My
hands were shaking as I spooned in the sugar. So were Michael's.
'You're mad, my friend,' he murmured, shaking his head. 'Utterly mad.
Worse than that, you have been stupid. They will not pay that kind of money.
Also, you have walked out on them, you have threatened them and you have
made a sudden, unreasonable demand. Are you really planning to launch a
PC trade magazine?'
'No,' I admitted. 'I only just thought of it while I was sitting there. I
haven't got the money to launch anything. You know that.'
We both sat sipping our coffee, Michael smoking one of his small cigars
from a tin. Ironically, they were Dutch cigars. I paid the bill, and while the
waitress was bringing my change, Michael tried one last time to persuade me
to do the sensible thing, 'Felix, I am your lawyer and your friend. Let me go
back and apologise. Two million pounds is an unbelievable sum of money. I
don't know of any new magazine that has ever sold for two million pounds
in Britain. Listen to me and let me go back. You don't have to go yourself.'
And I very nearly allowed Michael to do just that. But something held
me back. Something I had sensed but could not explain or articulate. Finally,
I smiled a little ruefully and patted Michael's arm: 'Michael, their need will
outweigh my greed. I am sure of it. Let's wait and see.'
So we waited.
Before we bring the story to its conclusion, let us pause and reflect on
what has happened here.
O The flea has established to his own satisfaction the elephant's urgent  
need.
O  The flea has learned to ignore flattery.
O The flea has learned that an elephant cannot be your friend in negotiations.
O The flea has learned he is not a good negotiator.O The flea has learned to 'empty' himself and make himself believe he docs
not care.
O The flea has overcome his lack of skill by setting a price he will not devi-
ate from.
O The flea has hardened his heart and has walked away when the price was
not met.
O The flea has introduced a rogue element (the trade magazine) into the
negotiations.
O The flea has weighed Greed vs. Need. He believes Need will outweigh
Greed.
Of course, you know the end of the story. We all met again round the big
table, this time with a lot more accountants and a lot more lawyers. The price
agreed was three million pounds. The escrow was a quarter of a million
pounds. Angelo got his million pounds. My company got the rest. I got to
launch my trade magazine, called Microscope, which kept me in the loop  
of
a new and growing market but out of VNU's way - for a while.
And what did the Dutch elephant get? It got a wonderful magazine
which is still being published and which still makes money today, twenty-
four
years later. They also persuaded me to help launch two more personal
computer magazines for them, one in the UK, which was a flop, and one in
Holland, which was a success.
Lastly, and very cleverly, VNU kept me out of the personal computer
market (except for my trade magazine) for three years. Three vital years.
They did that with a non-compete clause in the sale agreement. (Non-
compete clauses can be a bugger for those selling an asset. Keep the period
of non-compete as short as you can.)
And what of EMAP, the first elephant who had come calling? EMAP
never really succeeded in the personal computer magazine business. Not
in PCWs patch of the jungle. In virtually every other sector they reigned
(and continue to reign) supreme. They have whipped my butt time and
time again in other sectors. But they missed their chance with PCW. They
underestimated their need and were, probably rightly, appalled by this little
flea's greed.Not that I blame them. I've been on the receiving end as a buyer, rather
than a seller, too often now to blame them even remotely. But it was still an
error. Had David tipped the ante to one million pounds or more in my Soho
flat, my greed would probably have overwhelmed me, and Angelo and I
would have missed out on an additional two million pounds.
In today's figures, by the way, that two million pounds would he worth
about six million pounds, give or take. That's a huge chunk of change to
waste through making a mistake in negotiations.
A FEW TIPS ON NEGOTIATING
O Remember that few of us are any good at detailed negotiations. That
includes your opponent, by the way.
O If you ara a poor negotiator, like me, then set a limit on what you will
pay or accept and on any conditions attached. Do not deviate. Your first
thought is your best thought.
O Most negotiations are unnecessary. Don't enter into them. Remember
that 'the fortress that parleys is already half taken'. Save serious negotia-
tions for serious occasions.
O Do your homework. And do it rigorously. What you don't know or
haven't bothered to find out can kill you in any type of serious negotiation.
O Despite my jungle book examples above, the devil really is in the detail
in serious negotiations. Get all the professional help you can trust. But
do not surrender control of the negotiations or the agenda to such
professionals. They are not the ones who will have to live with the conse-
quences - you are. Professional advisors are there to explain and advise.
not to decide.
O If your advisors are leading you down a path you don't approve of during
your negotiations, call a 'time out' and tell them privately that if they
continue down that path you will get yourself some new advisors. The
world is full of them.
O Never fall in love with the deal. A deal is just a deal. There will always be
other deals and other opportunities.
O Avoid auctions in business like the plague - unless you are selling some-
thing, that is. You will nearly always pay more than was wise if you are
the 'winner' of an auction process.
O The negotiator opposite you is not your new best friend. He is not yourpartner. He is not your confidant. You have no obligation, outside of
ordinary courtesy, to please him or satisfy his demands. He is the enemy.
If you do not understand that real winners and real losers emerge from
serious negotiations then you will be robbed, whatever the circumstances.
O Take no notice of management manuals that tell you to leave passion and
emotion out of the negotiating room. If you are emotional or passionate
about something, then let it show. But leaven emotion with courtesy,
and, if possible, with wit. If you're not the witty type, then flattery and
self-deprecation are good substitutes.
O Listen when engaged in serious negotiations. Then listen some more. You
are in no hurry. Nobody ever got poor listening. Also, use silence as a
weapon. Silences are disconcerting. People tend to fill silences with
jabber, often weakening their bargaining position as they do so.
O Choose a rogue element to your advantage and bring it into the nego-
tiation at a late stage. You'll be amazed at how often this tactic
produces results.
O The British created the largest geophysical empire in the world with one
tactic: divide and rule. It always works. It never fails if you can get to
exploit it. Get to know the other side. There may be slight differences in
the individual approaches of their senior managers and, possibly, in their
goals. Drive a wedge and keep hammering.
O Permit no such weaknesses in your own camp, I have often banned
senior executives from taking part in negotiations simply to avoid this
trap. Better you are in there on your own, outgunned, outflanked and
outmanoeuvred, than to have two or three of you silently squabbling.
O Everyone thinks they are a great negotiator, but most of us simply are not.
If it's your company, then, for better or worse, you are the final arbiter.
That remains true whether you are a good negotiator or a had one.
O If you suspect you perform badly on such occasions, do not attend, even if
you are the 100 per cent owner. Get someone else to do it after setting out
your response to every conceivable option that might arise. This tactic can
be devastating to the other side, and Peter, Bob and I have used it on many
occasions in the past. You have to completely trust your nominee, though.
Q Above all, establish where the balance of weakness lies in any serious
negotiation. Most strengths are self-evident, especially strengths like cash
and infrastructure. Weaknesses are usually hidden. Ferret them out, hold
them up to the fight and make a battle plan.O Whatever you agree to during a negotiation, fulfil the bargain. Nobody
wants to do business with a weasel or a chisler. Written in the Zoroastrian
Scriptures two-and-a-half thousand years ago was this: 'Never break a
covenant, whether you make it with a false man or a just man of good
conscience. The covenant holds for both, the false and the just alike.'
Aye, that it does.
I will leave you on this subject with the words of Britain's closest rival to
Machiavelli: Francis Bacon. Bacon 'negotiated' his way from relative poverty
to the very pinnacle of wealth and power in England under King James I.
Then lost it all, and spent his last years writing and studying. His Essays are
among the wisest, most thought-provoking (and meanest) set of instructions
ever published in English, I sleep with them by my bedside.
This is from a short essay (short even by Bacon's standards) entitled 'Of
Negotiating', published in 1625, nearly four hundred years ago. Every word
of it is true today:
If you would work (negotiate with) any man, you must either know his
nature and fashions, and so lead him; or his ends, and so persuade him;
or his weakness or disadvantages, and so awe him; or those that have an
interest in him, and so govern him. In dealing with cunning persons, we
must ever consider their ends to interpret their speeches; and it is good to
say little to them, and that which they least look for. In all negotiations
of difficulty, a man may not took to sow and reap at once; but must
prepare business, and so ripen it by degrees.
Thank goodness Francis Bacon did not live in my time and go into the
British magazine business. I would never have got rich with such a rival in
the same city!1 2
OWNERSHIP!
OWNERSHIP!
OWNERSHIP!
How can you buy or sell the sky, the warmth of the land?
The idea is strange to us. If we do not own the freshness
of the air and the sparkle of the water, how can you buy them?
CHIEF SEATTLE, NINETEENTH-CENTURY AMERICAN INDIAN  
CHIEF OF THE SUQUAMISH
Private property began the instant somebody had a mind of his own.
EDWARD  E. CUMMINGS , AMERICAN  POET
THE PARADOX OF OWNERSHIP
How can anyone truly 'own' anything? Surely the answer is that we can claim
no such thing.
No animal but man lays claim to owning things or places. They merely
defend them - their lives, their mate, their cubs, their pack, their territory,
their food. If you introduce a new dog or cat into a household which
already contains one or two of these excellent creatures, there will be a
short, trying period of testing the waters and perhaps a scuffle or two, and
the thing is done.
A new animal soon finds its place in the collective hierarchy easily
enough. And it requires no parliament, written laws, police force, bailiff or
army to do so.
Human beings are different. We purport to believe that individuals can
'own' the most astonishing things; that they can own islands, mines, moun-
tains, forests and areas of the sea. Even more astonishingly we pretend that
mere names can own such things, for what is a partnership, a corporation or
a country but a name?
And to top it all, we believe that a name can own an executed idea - for
that is the basis of corporate intellectual ownership. The very type of owner-
ship that has been the foundation of my own wealth.
Perhaps even more preposterous is the universally accepted proposition
that an individual or entity can 'own' land, rivers, hills and deserts wheredinosaurs freely roamed for uncounted millennia. Roamed, mark you, long
before Homo sapiens sapiens was a twinkle in a small, shrew-like mammal's
eye. Not to mention that those lands, hills, rivers and deserts will be there
when not even a whisper of evidence survives to show that humans existed
on the blue planet.
This is not a book about philosophy, sociology or the history of human
law, but I believe it is worth remembering that ownership of any kind is
nonsensical. It is absurd and defies reason because we are all mortal and we
cannot (as yet) take it with us.
So what's this got to do with getting rich? I could say, 'Nothing, but
thank you for letting me get it off my chest'; but I won't say that, because
my amateurish musings illustrate very nicely just how idiotic the getting of
wealth, as a goal in and of itself, really is.
'Ah,' but you could argue, 'that's all very well for you. You have already
made your pile. It's easy to be philosophical when you've already amassed a
fortune.' And my reply would be that there is truth in that, but there is also
truth in the assertion that I may well have been only able to put a few
hundred minion dollars in the bank because I recognised that this getting
rich malarkey is just a game. A delusion, if you will.
Being rich is fine, and at the very least is better than being poor. But it
shouldn't be the be-all and end-all of your life, or anyone's life. If you can
laugh in the midst of early poverty and in the face of real adversity, and if you
can still laugh when you're coining it in, then you will almost certainly
continue to coin it in.
But if you chase money desperately in the earnest belief that you can never
be happy without it and seriously think that the chase is a meaningful occupa-
tion, I doubt very much you will succeed. You have to be fiercely determined,
true. But an appreciation of the absurdity of the chase helps enormously.
As the author G. K. Chesterton puts it in one of his Father Brown
stories: 'To be clever enough to get all that money, one must be stupid
enough to want it.' Mind you, Chesterton wasn't exactly averse to fine food
and wine himself.
OK, OK, enough musing. Now we'll get on with the job of stimulating
your accumulation of money as quickly as possible. But don't say your  
Uncle
Felix didn't warn you.
WHY OWNERSHIP ISN'T THE IMPORTANT THING -IT'S THE ONLY THING
A poor virgin, sir, an ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own.
WILLIAM  SHAKESPEARE , As YOU LIKE IT
So if ownership is a delusion, and we are all nothing more than consenting
thieves, how can we become successful thieves as early as possible? The
answer is simple. Very simple, and if you want to be rich then I ask you to
stop skipping paragraphs and pay close attention.
To become rich you must be an owner. And you must try to own it all.
You must strive with every fibre of your being, while recognising the idiocy
of your behaviour, to own and retain control of as near to 100 per cent of
any company as you can. If that is not possible, in a public company, for
example, then you must be prepared to make yourself hated by those
around you who are also trying to be rich. That is the dirty, rotten little
secret of it all, my friend. Just like Gollum, it is your Precious and they are
all 'filthy little thieves'.
You won't read that in any of those Become An Instant Millionaire In
Your Sleep manuals I mentioned earlier. Such works, nearly all written by
men and women who have never made a million anything in their lives,
usually witter on about becoming a better manager (who bloody cares about
becoming a better manager?) or creating 'partnerships', thinking 'outside
the box' and exploiting 'insanely great' ideas in totally innovative ways.
To put it bluntly, this is all bollocks. It has nothing to do with becom-
ing rich.
To become rich, every single percentage point of anything you own is
crucial. It is worth fighting for, tooth and claw. It is worth suing for. It is
worth shouting and banging on the table for. It is worth begging for and
grovelling for. It is worth lying and cheating for. In extremis, it is even  
worth
negotiating for.
Never, never, never, never hand over a single share of anything you have
acquired or created if you can help it. Nothing. Not one share. To no one.
No matter what the reason - unless you genuinely have to.
Do you remember my old 'rivals' Robin and David from the EMAP
elephant? They were both far better publishers than I will ever be. On my
best day they would have wiped the floor with me. But after a quarter of a
century of jointly creating one of the biggest media companies in Britain for
EMAP shareholders, what did they get for their pains?I don't know exactly, of course, and I wouldn't tell you if I did. But I'll
guess, using current market norms. £3 million? £5 million? £10 million? (I
doubt the last, but it could have been.) You mean that's it? That's all there
is after busting your balls for the best part of your working life and making
hundreds of shareholders and lawyers and banks immensely rich? A few
measly million pounds less tax? That's shocking.
I've made more than that in deals I can barely remember now. I once
made half a million by selling a magazine I had not even published yet to a
rival. Half a million pounds for a day's work. And why? Why? Why?
Because I owned it. I owned it all. And my dear friends David and Robin
never owned anything during their time there except for a pile of EMAP
share options, a good salary and a lovely pension. Please think about this if
you want to be rich. Ownership is not the most important thing. IT IS THE
ONLY THING THAT COUNTS.
Nothing else counts in the getting of money. Shareholder thanks do not
count. A good salary and a company car and health plan and pension don't
count. Most-share options (usually nothing more than the promise of chick -
enfeed to salaried employees, and a promise broken half the time, too), don't
count. The gratitude of colleagues doesn't count.
Nothing counts but what you own in the race to get rich. If you haven't
much skill, or much wit, or much talent, or much luck, and yet you insist on
owning more than your fair share of any start-up or acquisition, then you can
become rich. If you take what you're given, you will probably not get rich.
Years ago, in the early days of my company, four of my colleagues got
together and had a long talk, I assume in a pub, although I cannot be sure
of that. One was a senior manager, one was a publisher, one was a designer
and the other an editor. Together, they hatched a small conspiracy. Knowing
how important they were to my little company, they confronted me and
demanded a share. They bearded the lion in his lair.
They were polite and civilised about it. They pointed out that I owned
100 per cent of the company and could easily afford to share out, say, 20 per
cent between them. It wouldn't cost me anything and it was only fair. Those
were the words they used. They were working just as many hours (10-12
hours on a good day) as I was and they were committed to making the
company a huge success. They were even willing to discuss a slight reduction
in their salaries in return.
In addition, they went on, I should remember that such a 'dispersal' (I
remember they actually used that word, too) would incentivise them might-ily. Such a gesture would never be forgotten. And my remaining 80 per cent
of the company would ensure that I was still the boss.
However, should I not 'disperse' these shares among them, they
intended to leave. And leave immediately, virtually without notice. They
would have no option but to do so, although they didn't want to.
The company would suffer dreadfully - and might even fail altogether.
They had already agreed the name of their new company, in case I wouldn't
play ball, and had even registered it. They would set up as rivals. They were
serious and they meant business. All of this unpleasantness could be avoided
if I would just hand over a pitiful 20 per cent to them, perhaps based on
future performance?
Both as friends and colleagues, they earnestly advised me to consider
their demands dispassionately and honestly. In my heart, they argued, I knew
they were right. It was only fair.
I fired them on the spot. Or they walked away. I can't remember which
- it didn't matter then and it doesn't matter now. What mattered is that I
held on to every single share in my company. I would run the entire bloody
company myself, write the articles, design the pages, answer the phone and
sell the ads if I had to. But I would not part with a single, solitary share. Not
for love. Nor for fairness. Not for loyalty. Not for anything. And certainly not
for moral blackmail.
They set up their new company. They launched their magazine. Either it
folded or they gave it away, I don't remember now. Two of them came back
to work for me. There were no recriminations. I am on friendly terms with all
four of them to this day. Not one of them ever got rich. Nor ever will, I  
guess.
I didn't blame them, by the way. I would have tried the same stunt
myself if the positions had been reversed. But if I had tried it, I would have
made a damn sight more certain of its success.
'Why doth treason never prosper? For shouldst thou fail, thou must
hang. And if it doth succeed, why, 'twas never treason!'
Over the next thirty years, I estimate that their suggested 20 per cent,
had I handed it over, would have earned those four gentlemen around
$80,000,000 - say it again - eighty million dollars, in current asset value and
past dividends. This is the problem with sharing ownership. The laws of
simple mathematics are relentless and obdurate.And if I had given 20 per cent to those four employees, should I not have
had to do so with many others as they joined the company and worked hard
to make it a success? Where would it all end? I'm not a bloody charity. I'm
an entrepreneur trying to make a small fortune, not the Salvation Army. I  
pay
people to get a job done. And I pay them well. I try to make it as much fun
as I can along the way. I reward senior managers with bloody huge bonuses
based on performance and results. Millions of dollars have been paid out in
such bonuses over the years.
But I will not give them a share. Not one. Not for love. Nor for loyalty.
Not to be fair. Because capitalism isn't fair. Life isn't fair. The lottery of  
what
genes we are born with isn't fair. The moon and the stars and the gas clouds
of Alpha Centauri aren't fair.
Except for your loved ones or closest friends, it's every man for himself
in diis world, in case you haven't noticed: 'No prisoners! The Lord will know
his own!' Or, in the rapier advice of Benjamin Jowett, a nineteenth-century
master of Balliol College, Oxford: 'Never retreat. Never explain. Get it done
and let them howl.'
The best kind of fairness is the kind that makes money. Lots of money.
Then you can decide to do with it whatever you wish. There's a whole chap-
ter at the end of this book about it. (See Chapter 18: How to Stay Rich).
But we can't be wasting time thinking about and debating fairness while we
are in money-making mode. Money making and fairness having nothing to
do with each other.
Just how nasty can this all get? Say you have a brother and you want to
start a business together. You should begin with the proposition that you will
own the business and he will work for it. Fight for this tenaciously. Begin by
assuming it.
If that won't fly, then absolutely insist that you own 75 per cent of the
shares. The reasons are immaterial. Make a spurious list of them and wave it
about. Say you won't go into business unless you own the majority share.
Have a temper tantrum. Shout. Scream. Wave the bloody bit of paper about
again. Say you'll work longer hours. Say you will find more capital than he
will. Say anything. But GET A BIGGER SHARE OF THE COMPANY
FOR YOURSELF.
Then, and only then, should you return to being a reasonable human
being. You can now afford to be reasonable. You are going to be richer thanyour brother. Perhaps a lot richer. It is as simple and as vile and as nasty as
that. Would I do it to my brother, Julian, whom I love very much? Yes. In a
heartbeat, if I had to. Would I give my brother all the money I ever made if
he needed it? Yes, I would. But I WILL NOT GIVE HIM A SHARE IN
MY COMPANY!
Because ownership isn't the important thing. If you want to be rich, it's
the only thing.
THE JOYS AND PERILS OF PARTNERSHIP
'He ain't heavy ... he's my brother.'
SONG TITLE, BOB RUSSELL AND Bobby SCOTT
Come to think of it, I never have. Given a share to my brother, that is. And
he never asked me for one. He's a sensible man with a loyal wife and two
lovely children. He doesn't want my bloody shares.
Nor have I ever given a single share to anybody. And yet, unlike most
entrepreneurs I know, I have enjoyed a wonderful thirty-year-plus relation-
ship with my 'white knight' American partners, Peter Godfrey and Robert
Bartner.
In the UK, I clung to my 100 per cent ownership like a limpet. In the
USA and elsewhere, I happily hitched up with Peter and Bob. And we are
still hitched, decades later. We have together created many companies, which
have operated in many countries. We have split the ownership of those
companies in a dozen different ways. Once, I owned 80 per cent and they
owned 10 per cent each. On another occasion, we owned 33.3 per cent each.
On more than one occasion I have been a minority shareholder.
It never mattered. The partnership has held like a rock through all the
stormy weather and the trials and tribulations that are the lot of any long
business life. We have shouted at each other a few times and we have cried
on each other's shoulders more than once. We have enjoyed the thrill of the
chase immensely. We have helped to make each other millionaires times  
with-
out number.
Once, and only once, I even acted as an honest broker when Bob was
thinking of suing Peter (or was it the other way round?) - I honestly cannot
remember over what. But the point is, the partnership held, and has always
reflected just two principles as far as sharing the pie was concerned. These are:
1.Who is putting what capital into a venture?2.Who is doing what work on that venture?
I believe I have been a good partner and an honest one for Peter and Bob,
And I know they have been good and honest partners for me. We make a
good team.
I am the creative maverick and usually the risk-taker. Peter is the
cautious, stubborn and worldy-wise one. He's hard to convince. But he is a
great negotiator in a clinch. Bob is the nuts and bolts wild card. He does not
suffer fools or errors gladly. He goes through 'the numbers' with a voracious
appetite for them.
Bob is willing to voice misgivings that Peter and I (especially me, it has
to be said) might quietly sweep under the carpet. It was Bob who refused,
years ago, to invest one more personal cent in one of our companies. He had
realised, long before Peter and me, that we simply were not rich enough to
feed this particular monster. We would have to do what we had never  
consid-
ered before. We would have to go public. That was Bob's doing.
While Peter was working the longest hours of his life to keep this beast
afloat, and I was stripping my own UK company of senior managers and  
hurl-
ing them into the American monster's maw, Bob simply went to some people
he knew and told them we needed to go public. Without Bob, Peter and I
might well have worked and worried ourselves to death. We were rich men by
then, but not rich enough to fund what became a $2 billion corporation.
That's the best part of a true partnership. You always have a brother to
help carry the load. And if things go wrong, you have a built-in drinking
buddy with whom to drown your sorrows! And you have a built-in
conscience, too. No bad thing.
So if this is the case, why am I so insistent upon outright ownership,
or, at the very least, as much as you can wangle? It's simple. I could always
walk away from the partnership with Peter and Bob if we fell out. I had my
own company doing my own thing under my own control three thousand
miles away.
And I believe the same has been true for them. Despite our close friend-
ship and real affection for each other, this knowledge, that any one of us
could walk away from the others if he wished, that illusion of freedom - if
illusion it was - made it possible to compromise with each other when things
got tough in our partnership business.If Peter and Bob had represented every iron I had in the fire, if our part-
nership had been the only hope I had of making real money, then I believe
it might well have disintegrated almost before it began - never mind lasting
for three decades. A partnership is not a marriage. In a marriage, you should
be willing to die for your partner. To share everything. To kill for them, if
you have to.
But in a partnership, the making of money comes first. Friendship and
affection comes later - if you're lucky, as I have been.
I hope that you too, dear reader, will one day be lucky enough to find
such partners and enjoy similar success. But my earnest advice is that you
establish yourself first, retaining as much control of any start-up or  
acquisition
as you can, and then, and only then, seek pastures new with partners in the
picture. That's a great way to spread risk. Partners are a wonderful thing. But
they are not a marriage - except of convenience. Ideally, you should keep
something of your own to fall back on.
Why else is ownership so vital to anyone who wants to get rich?
Ownership buys you the luxury of time. Not only the luxury of occasionally
considering a partnership or an investment elsewhere. Ownership means
never having to waste time saying sorry that a business didn't work out. It
means not having to spend weeks and weeks trying to persuade your part-
ners that a certain course of action is necessary. It means that, for better or
worse, you can concentrate on building the business and making money. Or
losing it without the added burden of guilt.
Which brings us to minority shareholders and investors. I have owned
companies with minority shareholders. And 1 have always gone out of my
way to be fair to them and their interests. But I cannot pretend that they
were not a burden. Let me explain by way of example. Should I wish the
company we co-own to invest all its profits for three years to build itself, a
minority shareholder might (understandably) complain: 'It's all right for
you. But I depend on the dividends the company would pay me if we did not
invest so much. I want to protest at your investment strategy.'
Then begins a long, tortuous affair of meetings and spreadsheets and
jockeying for position. Not because I could not force the issue. But because
to force the issue will waste a lot of precious time and energy. Even more
time and energy than those endless meetings will take. Time is the only thing
we cannot replace, apart from our health and our lives. I resent wasting a
moment of it.But if you want to be rich and you are forced to take minority share-
holders on board, then I guarantee that, sooner or later, you will waste weeks
or even months in the attempt to obtain mutual agreement. It is unavoid-
able.
One of the more amusing, and deadly, clauses that can be inserted into
any shareholder agreement is worth bearing in mind here. This clause is the
'Mexican Shootout'. I have only seen it used once, and it all got pretty hairy
before it was done, but there's no question it resolves disputes between
shareholders quickly. Here's how it works.
In the Articles of Association of a company, both sides agree to insert a
clause that governs serious disputes. If the dispute cannot be resolved, then
the following takes place. Each side in the dispute, each shareholder who
wishes to participate, considers carefully what they would be willing to pay
for the whole company. It doesn't matter how many shares they own, but
they must have access to the sum they have indicated, less the worth of their
own shares valued on an equal basis.
The parties then go to a neutral lawyer or professional on a certain day
and bring with them a scaled envelope with nothing inside it but their esti-
mate of the company's entire worth. Or, at the least, what they are willing
to pay in total for the company. The lawyer then opens the envelopes.
Whoever has bid the highest amount is now the owner of the company and
must pay the losing side for their shares, based on the winner's valuation.
The Mexican Shootout is a brilliant, hair-raising solution, and there are
many variations on it. But there are drawbacks. It rather depends which side
of the fence you are on. In general, it favours the minority investor.
From the minority shareholder's point of view, it offers the only chance
he or she will ever have to own the company for certain. It's true that the
majority shareholder might consider selling to the minority. But he or she
doesn't have to if the clause is omitted from the Articles. Only the shootout
can force the issue, providing the minority bids high enough.
From the majority shareholder's point of view, providing they have suffi-
cient cash, of course, it offers the only certain chance to be rid of a trouble-
some pest. But the majority shareholder has more to lose. The balance of
weakness is in his or her court.
If you start off as equal partners with 50 per cent each (and I told you not
to da that'.) then the 'Mexican Shootout' can save months, even years of
weary argument, lost sleep and soul-numbing, teeth-grinding negotiation.  
IfI was the majority shareholder, I would never permit the shootout to appear
in the Articles of Association. If I was a minority shareholder, I might not
invest without it being there.
Naturally this book is going to be read by millions. I can therefore expect
thousands of emails and letters from successful minority shareholders or
minority partners who have never owned the whole of their business and yet
have prospered mightily. They will claim that I am exaggerating the prob-
lems of shared ownership.
And perhaps they are right and I am nothing but a greedy little sod who,
all unknowing, has been cowering in his solitary shell since the day he was
thrown into prison. Quite possibly. But at least I am a fairly rich little sod
cowering in his shell. What I have written here about ownership has worked
for me, that is all.
I believe you should be cautious, very, very cautious indeed, before you
take up with a partner or invest as a minority shareholder. At the very least
you should spend hours with a patient, sensible lawyer (if you can find such
a creature), going through the Memorandum and Articles of the new
company. Every minute you spend on that task may well be repaid a thou-
sandfold, a millionfold at some point in the future.
Unlike a marriage, you must contemplate the end game before taking the
plunge. Just how will it end? How can it be ended with least damage to the
business and the hearts and minds of the partners? These are questions you
must consider seriously before you sign the partnership documents.
In summary, unless you already own a successful business outright, then
I do not recommend you enter into a partnership of any kind if you can avoid
it. It's time-consuming and distracting. If you have any choice whatever in  
the
matter, walk your narrow, lonely road to riches all on your little ownsome.
As I mentioned before, it's a nasty, lonely business getting rich.
WHY GOING PUBLIC IS DIFFERENT
The public be damned! I work for my stockholders.
WILLIAM H. VANDERBILT, US RAILWAY MAGNATE
There is absolutely no comparison between running and owning a private
company and running a public company. (Note: by definition you cannot
'own' a public company, although you can certainly control one, providing
you are willing to put up with a great deal of scrutiny.)We may be getting a little ahead of ourselves here, as you have yet to get
rich in any environment, presumably. But should you manage to achieve that
objective successfully, you can be certain that the subject of'going public'
will creep its way onto the agenda in due course. And as going public is one
way to become very rich indeed, we need to take a cursory look at it,
I once helped to found what became a fair-sized public company,
MicroWarehouse, and I was a part of the process of taking it public. A small
part. That is, I owned a lot of the shares and I was asked to sign a lot of
papers. My American partners, Peter and Bob, did most of the heavy lifting
to get us public. Peter in particular.
This was because they knew damn well that if they foolishly permitted
me to play a major role in the process of going public, the whole shebang
might have come crashing down about our cars. That would not have been
a good idea. There was a lot of money at stake. Hundreds and hundreds of
millions of dollars, in fact.
Let's face it, I've worked hard over the years so as to be able to tell
anyone I want in business to take a hike. But just prior to, and during, the
complicated process of taking a private company into the public domain (the
NASDAQ in our case), creative mavericks and members of the Awkward
Squad are not welcome at the table.
Which table? Why, the table where endless meetings with investment
bankers and their ferret-faced lieutenants take place. Where lawyers drone
incomprehensibly to each other about gobbledegook with faces that look
like they're sucking a lemon. Where the sight of a woolly-haired Brit taking
a cigarette out of his pocket would probably have caused the building to be
evacuated and the fire brigade and building security to be called.
No, Peter and Bob were wise. It wasn't my scene. Nevertheless, I was
forced to listen to enough lectures and to sit round enough tables and listen
to sufficient corporate legal eagles to gather that my partners and I were
entering a different world. We were about to be entrusted with massive  
quan-
tities of the public's cash. And if we screwed up in any one of a hundred ways,
then it was chokey for us, go straight to prison, do not pass go, game over.
I learned, for example, that after we were a public company and I was a
director of that company, then should I be foolish enough to accept a call
from anyone, or meet them over lunch, and casually mention that business
was particularly brilliant right now and that we would be announcing that
fact formally in the near future, then I placed myself in peril. Worse still, Iwould place Peter and Bob and my other fellow directors in similar peril.
Should the person I had so casually spoken to then rush out and buy my
company's shares, I might well find myself in prison. Should he then send  
me
a case of the finest Pomerol wine on the planet merely to thank me for what
I'd told him, then I would definitely go to jail. And so might Peter and Bob.
This is kind of an odd thing for an entrepreneur to take on board.
Entrepreneurs are always bullshitting each other about how great business is;
it's virtually an epidemic disease with us. But what I would have done  
within
a public corporate environment by telling this mythical buddy what I told
him and drinking the wine he sent, even with the best of intentions, would
have been insider trading. A big no-no in the world of publically traded
stocks and shares.
(Insider trading is an easy one to understand. If you help to run a public
company, nobody gets to know how you are doing before everybody gets to
know. Got that? It doesn't matter if the news is good or bad. It must not be
alluded to outside of your professional advisors and company colleagues.
Especially the upcoming quarterly earnings and revenues. Just don't  
mention
it. Not even to yourself in the bath.)
And this was just one of hundreds and hundreds of such rules and regu-
lations we had to remember. Peter would sit with me over a drink and lecture
me endlessly on keeping my mouth shut about our business. I became so
paranoid that I almost became a voluntary mute. It was crazy and depress-
ing. Of course, I got the hang of it in time, and everything went well in the
end. But, boy, was I glad to sell those shares a few years later and get the hell
out of there.
Now don't get the wrong idea. Going public made me a fortune. And
unlike a private business, it seemed that the more we divested (sold off) our
shares, the richer we became, because more people bought them and the
more those shares we still had left were worth. That sounds weird, but it's
exactly what happened. In a private company I would virtually have to be
pried away from my shareholding with a crowbar - until I was ready to sell
the whole shooting match, anyway. But with a public company, everything
seemed to be topsy-turvy.
And that included selling shares. Just as directors of a public company
cannot use their inside knowledge to enrich their lunch buddies, even inad-vertently, so they must not use that knowledge to enrich themselves. By sell-
ing shares when things are going badly, for instance. Not unless everyone
knows things are going badly. Got it?
There were other weird rules and mantras we had not faced as a private
corporation. Growth was apparently all that counted. Growth in share price.
Growth in corporate revenues. And being in the 'right' markets (like the
internet, at that time). Profits were not the issue. Nobody seemed to care
that not a cent had ever been made by any company trading on the internet
back then. All that mattered was that we achieved compound growth in
flavour-of-the-month markets.
When I say ' we achieved ...' what I really mean is that ''Peter achieved'.
Peter Godfrey was the lead partner on Micro Warehouse, both before and
after it went public. He took to it like a duck to water. Here, the power of
trust in a true partnership revealed itself in letters of fire.
Day after day, month after month, year after year, Peter drove himself
and his Connecticut management team to the brink of mental and physical
exhaustion. He had elected himself chairman, CEO and president - and I
thank my lucky stars to this day that he did. Both his steely temperament and
attention to detail were uniquely suited to this ball-breaking task - and
suited, too, to marathon board meetings (which sometimes lasted ten hours
or more) and to smoothing the ruffled feathers of institutional investors.
The paperwork alone was beyond my comprehension. I remember stag-
gering into one board meeting carrying two huge bags stuffed with reports,
agendas and memoranda. Then Bob arrived with three bags full. Then Peter
marched in with an associate buckled under the weight of a filing-cabinet-
sized pile. We all burst out laughing, perhaps a little sheepishly. But the  
strain
was beginning to tell. Public company management was testing to the limit
what had once been an easy-going partnership.
As Micro Warehouse grew from a half billion, to a billion, then to nearly
two billion dollars of revenues from operations in half a dozen countries,
Bob and I knew we were virtually tagging along for the ride. We did our best
and we kept our heads down, but we never really got the hang of it the way
Peter did. We kept thinking like entrepreneurs, making unhelpful entrepre-
neurial suggestions. Personally, I was way out of my depth - and was all too
aware of it.
A private company could never have operated in the way Peter was
required to run Micro Warehouse. A private company lives on profits andreserves. There has to be a balance between investment and profit-taking.
Between growth and the bottom line. In a private company, growth is not a
goal in itself; you only grow if it makes sense to grow.
But a public company exists only to boost its share price, and its share
price is determined, incredibly enough, by 'analysts' - spotty-faced youths
who live on another planet where growth-at-any-price is the only deity one
is encouraged to worship. Medium- or long-term strategies were for wimps
and amateurs, in their estimation, 'This quarter's results, this quarter's
growth, were the only things that mattered to them. It almost seemed, at
times, as if profit was a dirty word. If we were making 'profits', asked the
'analysts', weren't we in danger of 'wasting' money that could have been
invested to produce more 'growth'?
Huh?
Madness! But it made me very rich. It made all three of us very rich. I
cannot deny that. Sales of our Micro Warehouse shares put hundreds of
millions of dollars in our collective pocket. Peter's tour de force had paid 
off.
All was well that ended well.
And how did it end? It ended when we engineered the sale of
MicroWarehonse back into the private sector via a huge investment consor-
tium. Suddenly, our services were no longer required. The so-called 'profes-
sionals' had taken over. As far as I was concerned, they were welcome to it.
I think even Peter was glad it was finally over. I categorically know that his
wife Barbara was!
I remember the evening Peter came to join Bob and me at a quiet cele-
bration in a small Manhattan restaurant following the sale. I barely recognised
him as he approached our table, casually dressed in a leather jacket and base-
ball cap - I hadn't seen him without a suit and tie for nearly five years. Nor
was he carrying the ever-present bags full of paper. But the strain of the past
few years' toil was etched all over his beaming face as he threw his hands in
the air, to the astonishment of other diners, and recited a joyous imitation of
Martin Luther King: 'Free at last! Free at last! God Almighty, I'm free at last!'
Bob and I had our partner back from the salt mines, and all was well with
the world. Even today, I wonder how the three of us ever found our way out
of that nightmare labyrinth.
That's all I know, and all I want to know, about public companies. From
my perspective, they are not sane places and their share prices are not decidedby sane people. Perhaps it's different when a company has been public for
many years. But the first few years of any such enterprise are ones of gut-
wrenching adjustment, soul-destroying workloads and barely concealed
terror. It's a high price to pay for those at the sharp end.
But hey! If you want to be rich, sometimes you have to sup with the
devil. And nobody cares, least of all 'analysts', how long or how short your
spoon is.
1 3
THE JOYS OF
DELEGATION
Work is of two kinds: first, altering the. position of matter
at or near the earth's surface relatively to other such matter;
second, telling other people to do so. The first is unpleasant
and ill paid; the second is pleasant and highly paid.
BERTRAND  RussELL, 'I N PRAISE  OF IDLENESS '
This will be one of the shortest chapters in my book. The quote above from
the philosopher and mathematician Bertrand Russell says it all. Well, nearly
all. Not that Russell was ever a rich man. He was too wise for that.
Try reading his quote again and reflecting for a moment. Under what
circumstances is his statement not quite true? Quite a few, when you begin
to think about it.
For example, I understand that the foul-mouthed and amusing US
'shock jock' Howard Stern is now about to earn hundreds of millions of
dollars by switching his shows to a new satellite radio network. Good for
him. He has the right to have as much fun at the expense of others as he
wishes and to get as rich as he pleases. But how much would Mr Stern earn
if he delegated his show to others?
The answer is that, after a short while, he would get nothing. His listen-
ers and viewers want Howard Stern. He must 'alter the position of matter at
or near the earth's surface relatively to other such matter' himself. He cannot
tell others to do it. His audience would not put up with a substitute. Actors,
celebrities, kings, politicians, artists and a host of others, either do the job in
person, or they lose the job - and the income that comes with the job.
Sure they can delegate certain things to others. But Queen Elizabeth II,for example, ensures her role by appearing, in person, in a punishing round
of personal audiences and appearances that would tax the stamina of some-
one a third of Her Majesty's age. For the queen, as with Mr Stern, personal
attendance is mandatory.
Back in 1861, the young Queen Victoria was shattered by the death of
her husband, Prince Albert and went into self-imposed seclusion from public
life. This did not go down well with her ministers or with her subjects. 'The
Widow of Windsor' was informed after some years, pretty brutally, that either
she must get back in the spotlight or she must abdicate. Not surprisingly (and
probably deeply unamused), she tottered back on stage.
Delegation for many, then, will only stretch so far. But for most of us
with a desire to get rich, it will take us further than the inexperienced could
believe. And, as Bertrand Russell noted, it is by far the most pleasant part of
the whole business.
I say this not because I am idle - I'm anything but - but because the
exercise of delegation, used responsibly, allows you to bring out the best in
others and to make yourself rich in the process. It is the nearest thing to a
'virtuous circle' imaginable. Just imagine getting rich while you're helping
others to help you get richer and prove their worth in the process. Magic!
It used to be surprising to me why so many people appeared to have a
problem with delegating. But I finally figured it out, and the answer isn't a
pretty one. It concerns our old bugaboo, ownership.
If you own a company and that company's purpose is to make you
wealthy, you will be content, delighted even, for any amount of glory to go
to anyone who works there, providing you get the money. It is in your best
interests to delegate whenever it makes sense in such circumstances.
If you do not own the company, or a part of it, then it is possible you are
only a senior manager because you like power. It is not true of everyone, of
course. But often enough. You like bossing people about. You enjoy telling
them what to do. If that is the case, then you might be understandably reluc-
tant to delegate real power or opportunity, in case the person you delegate
to proceeds to excel. This, in turn, may well demonstarte to the rest of the
company what a no-hum manager you really are.
This is a warped way of thinking. But I am convinced it lies behind much
of the reluctance to delegate I have encountered in my business life. I used
to be surprised at the reluctance of others, both in and out of my own
companies, to delegate. Now I'm not.Bossy people and glory hounds are mostly interested in building a power
base so they can have yet more people to boss about. It's pitiful and a tittle
sad, but we have all seen it. We saw it in school. We saw it in the  
playground.
We saw it in college. And we saw it in our first job. If you are observant, you
have been seeing it nearly all your life.
Such bullies and toads appear to cover the earth. They often gravitate
towards jobs that give the appearance of power but which require low(ish) 
skill
levels - security companies, the prison service, immigration and customs, 
minor
civil service roles, non-commissioned officers in the armed forces, and so on. I
am not suggesting that these organisations are made up solely of such 
creatures;
but who would disagree that they have more than their fair share of them?
This is fine, because they are easy to spot in such rotes, and they have to
work somewhere. They are mostly an obnoxious nuisance. But cleverer  
spec-
imens are also probably working right next door to you today. The truly evil
ones, through a combination of fawning, flattery, smoke, mirrors and luck
(and occasionally, even talent), have risen to the middle ranks and have
people reporting directly to them.
This type of managerial toad will often talk about training and delegation
in sepulchral tones, but then, as the old proverb tells us, 'the Devil can quote
scripture for his own purpose'. Such toads know they are unlikely to rise
further, but take pleasure in ensuring that you won't, either.
When they do delegate, they enjoy delegating tasks they believe are either
impossible or beyond the recipient's ability to complete satisfactorily. How
do you counter this idiocy? You don't - unless you own the company, in
which case you fire them. I have fired a few. It was the only time I enjoyed
firing anyone.
You can't deal with bossy, puffed-up sods who won't train you and won't
delegate. You can only move departments or change your place of work. It
isn't worth the time to do anything else.
The whole point about getting rich is not to have to deal with this
nonsense. Office politics can be fun, as can all forms of politics, but to many
people they are upsetting. They reduce productivity and dent morale. They
can take up astonishing amounts of time. They increase the number of'sickdays' in a department - which is often a good indication that a toad is in
charge and needs to be winkled out of its hole.
True delegation is an entirely different matter and can often be a joy to
be involved in. On both sides. As an owner, or an owner in training, you
must always be alert for the telltale signs that here is a candidate for promo-
tion and delegation. They are smart. Perhaps smarter than you are. They
work hard and they appear to love the work they do. They ask intelligent
questions and don't waste time gossiping and mucking about. They listen
and correct their errors, and don't repeat them. They want your job.
Especially in the early days of your company, delegation and promotion
are among your most powerful weapons to get rich. Men and women with
spirit will be prepared to leave safe, comfortable jobs and work for you,
providing the atmosphere of the new operation is loaded with optimism,
adventure, the sweet scent of delegation and the promise of promotion.
Not everyone works to get rich. In fact, most people do not. But almost
everyone wishes to be respected. With promotion comes respect. And with
delegation comes promotion. If your company is young and a bit rickety,
meritocracy, delegation and promotion are the bricks and mortar that will
make it stronger.
Do not seek a replica of yourself to delegate to, or to promote. Watch
out for this, it is a common error with people setting out to build a company.
You have strengths and you have weaknesses in your own character. It  
makes
no sense to increase those strengths your organisation already possesses and
not address the weaknesses.
If you are bad at keeping records and filing and tend sometimes to shoot
from the hip, for example (that sounds a familiar description!) then bring in
people who have the organisational skills that you lack and who tend to be
of a more even disposition. It's so easy to delegate important work to people
who arc similar in temperament and skill-sets to you, or to promote them.
So easy and so wrong. You may be the founder or the owner, but you cannot
do everything yourself- even if you could make time stand still. By setting
an example early on with a programme of carefully tailored delegation and
well-deserved promotion, you will create an atmosphere of loyalty, efficiency
and camaraderie that feeds upon itself. An atmosphere poisonous to toads.
Any leader will tell you of the importance of morale. And it is important.
It cannot compensate for sloppy work, or for lack of persistence or belief in
yourself. It cannot compensate for a lack of determination to succeed or forill fortune. Nonetheless, good morale, a pervasive feeling of 'us against the
world', combined with the promise of responsible delegation and promotion
based on achievement, can move mountains. And under those mountains is
gold. Your gold.
But what exactly is delegation?
Let me put it this way. The work undertaken by your colleagues and
employees is more important than your work. Your job is merely to lead,
perhaps just to point in the right direction. This is advice I suspect will fall
on stony ground for the uninitiated. Let me be crystal clear.
I am not suggesting you will have an easy time of it or that you will not
work long and unsociable hours. You will. All of us who made our own
money did and it will be little different for you. But I have the benefit now
of hindsight, I look back along the years and see myself working like a
proverbial Trojan. A stupid Trojan. You can avoid this trap.
I see a young man who would think nothing of working a sixteen-hour
day - going out into the London night for a drink and a swift curry, coming
back into the office for a few hours' kip on the office sofa and beginning the
process all over again. And I see the same young man, dragging himself in
on Saturdays and Sundays, pale with self-inflicted exhaustion. Snappy. Quick
to criticise and too slow to delegate and praise others. I see a young man
trying too hard, but not delegating enough.
Month after month, in those early days, I battered myself and my staff
into setting world records for stamina and effort. Did it make me rich? No.
It made me tired, bad-tempered and arrogant. It led me to make errors of
judgement which I would have avoided had I gone about it a smarter way.
In essence, all I did was show my 'troops' that I possessed awesome
stamina. I was the toughest digger in the mine and I could shovel more coal
than any two of the rest of them put together. Big deal.
I had forgotten that I wasn't in a bloody mine. I wasn't being paid for
the hours I kept. Miners rarely get rich. They merely build a legend if they
are strong enough or unlucky enough to waste their life in an unhealthy and
poisonous environment. Fortunately, this fit of madness (it tasted about
three years) eventually passed.
I only started to get rich when I began to delegate and to ease up on my
work schedule. How exactly this occurred I'm not certain. Selecting good
people has never been a problem for me - yes, I know everyone thinks that,
but I have a pretty good track record to back it up. Perhaps those talentedpeople began to edge up on me without my knowing. Perhaps they 'stole'
work inch by inch. And perhaps I had just enough wit to let them.
I'm sure my 'vanishings' on a boat in the Norfolk Broads helped. I
would just take off (no notice, no plan), summer or winter, and allow the
boat to wander among the reeds and herons and riverside villages for a week
or two. Alone mostly. Or with a friend from my school days called Bruce
Sawford, who had the companionable knack of not talking too much.
During those unscheduled absences, life in our tiny company had to go
on. There were some smart young boys and girls there, and they grew used
to my peripatetic absences. In the interim, they would 'delegate' the work to
themselves and often keep those responsibilities when I returned. Yes, I think
that was how it happened.
It wasn't a good way to go about growing a company. Nor a very smart
one. But I had no rote model, nor even the vaguest grasp of management
techniques. I just assumed the world revolved around me and everything
would turn out OK if I worked an insane number of hours every day. Rather
like setting a billion monkeys typing incessantly in the hope that one of
Shakespeare's plays would emerge.
My company was lucky to survive those early days and I owe a real debt
to the colleagues who worked with me back then. It probably helped that my
company was a fun place to work, otherwise it might not have survived.
Added to which, hard work never bothers the young. They think they are
built of steel.
But you don't have to go about starting up a business like that. You have
the benefit of reading this book and examining all the ridiculous errors I
made as I stumbled from one catastrophe to another. Then again, there are
a lot more entrepreneurial role models, like Richard Branson, to learn from
these days. There weren't so many back in the early 1970s, or at least it
didn't seem as if there were.
How do you learn how to delegate wisely? Trial and error, I would say.
I have been constandy surprised all my business life at who faces up to chal-
lenges best. It is very often not those who talk the best talk.
For example, I used to fancy myself as a great negotiator in big deals, but
I have learned that I am not. The reason is that I never do negotiate, I only
dictate. That's fine if the other side's need is greater than yours in the balance
of weakness. But what if there is a potential win-win situation to be reached
through patient and reasoned negotiating?That's when I delegate. Automatically and without thinking. I have
people who work for me who are patient, who listen better than I do, and
who are quiedy determined to get the best deal they can with a potential
partner while not scaring them off. They are willing to compromise, but not
to surrender. Long after I would have lost interest and wandered away to
find something more interesting to do, they will still be patiendy negotiat-
ing until an agreement is reached. These are not people I would ask into the
room to negotiate the sale of a large asset. They have too much empathy
with the other side. But for the majority of symbiotic deals and arrangements
a company needs to make, their skills far surpass mine.
What else do I delegate? Almost everything now. I do not run my
companies and have not done so for many, many years. Rivals do not believe
this. They smile knowingly when I tell them that. Perhaps because many of
them are not good delegators. But they are wrong. I don't run my compa-
nies. And I have no desire to.
Instead of attempting to stay in day-to-day control, I have devised a
system where I keep overall control, but do not involve myself in running a
business unless I wish to get involved for a particular reason, I use the power
of veto instead.
By making myself the chairman of all my companies, I can choose to
attend or not attend senior management or board meetings as it suits me.
On average, I will attend four to six such meetings a year for each company.
The chair is usually taken in my absence by the MD, the president or
the CEO, Verbatim minutes are taken. (I do read all the minutes of these
meetings very carefully, and I can get a mite cross if diey are not produced
promptly and accurately. For me, they are not a memorandum of past
events. They are a tool to understanding current positions.) I also have Ian
Leggett, my personal financial manager as well as my group CFO, placed on
all these boards. If I am not present, you can be sure he is.
My vetoes are carefully explained and very well known to all of my exec-
utives, who agree to abide by them before they join the board. It's a short
list, but has worked well for many years.
Without my express permission:
1.They may not vote anyone on or off the board.
2.They may not physically move the headquarters of the company.
3.They may not dispose of, or shut down, any substantial asset.4.They may not purchase, or launch, any substantial new product or
business.
5.They may not award themselves bonuses or salary increases.
That's it. No more vetoes. Within those guidelines, the managers of my
companies are free to get on with their jobs, grow the business and reach the
margin return agreed upon at the beginning of the year. A margin that they
will have arrived at among themselves by consensus. With Tan's beady eye on
them while they do it!
If things go wrong in a particular part of the business, then I will get
involved. When we are about to launch, sell or close something, I am always
involved.
To run a group of companies like this you have to trust your managers
and directors. You can only do it if you have learned, by long experience,  
the
art ot delegation. It is important to distinguish between delegation and
abandonment. Absentee landlords never prosper. I am not absent. But I am
not exactly toiling with the troops side by side, every minute of every day.
My days of toiling in those particular mines are well and truly over.
To be honest, I suspect my managers prefer it that way. They certainly
get to take more scary decisions more often. And that's half the thrill of
their job, I hope. As our senior management turnover rate is one of the
lowest in the industry, and has been for years, my system must have some-
thing going for it.
One thing I do to compensate for this style of ownership is to look hard
for signs of excellent work. When I spot it on one of our websites, or in a
magazine, or from management minutes or financial results, I drop a hand-
written note to whoever is responsible. And I do it often.
I also invite folk who work for me to visit me in my private office, which
is about half a mile from our company headquarters, usually after work. And
when I visit any particular company in the flesh, it's usually without warning,
on the spur of the moment.
Why do I do things this way? Because I want to write poetry and plant a
forest in the heart of England, and that takes a lot of time. Because I have a
life and intend to lead it. Because I have discovered that many, many people
are better managers than I am. Because I have learned that obsessive micro-
management scares away talent.
And most of all, because I learned to delegate a long time ago and toaccept that you must allow young managers the opportunity to make
mistakes without crushing them or blaming them when things go wrong.
(You can always fire them if they make the same error over and over.)
Because I love to see talent grow in the stable and watch it come hurtling
out of the box at full gallop. Because it make me a little proud to be a part
of such a process. Because I get easily bored. For all of those reasons.
I'm not saying mine is the greatest system ever devised, and I am sure
you will devise your own. You need great senior managers to keep my partic-
ular way sweet. In any case, you may be one of those who feels guilty when
you are out of the office while others toil to keep your company humming
and growing. I can relate to that. That's just how I used to feel.
On a related note, let me make a plea concerning the pernicious role of
electronic communication in delegation. I'll start by confessing that I am
something of a Luddite when it comes to emails and texting and  
Blackberries
and downloads and mobile phones. Quite frankly, I hate the things and all
their works.
It enrages me to see senior managers wasting their time (often hours each
day) wading through emails, which are often informing them that the recep-
tionist's sister has just had a baby or some such nonsense. I have been known
to wreak physical violence on a cell phone that begins to squawk in the  
middle
of meetings, or on a Blackberry which is being used surreptitiously under thetable by its owner. Not only is it bad manners, such interruptions break the
flow and concentration necessary for real decision-making.
All this is bad enough. But have you ever considered how the growth
of such devices has conspired to damage and corrupt delegation in the work-
place? If you go on holiday or a business trip and keep obsessively in touch
via a mobile phone or Blackberry with the office, what does that say about
your management style? About the trust you have in your colleagues 'mind-
ing the ranch'?
It says you don't trust them. It says you cannot delegate meaningfully. It
says you are a meddler and a micro-manager So don't do it!
If you want to get rich, then learn to delegate. Don't learn to pretend to
delegate. Delegation is not only a powerful tool, it is the only way to
maximise and truly incentive your most precious asset - the people who
work for you.
Real delegation can help make you rich. But only if you work at it. 1 4
A PIECE
OF THE PIE
What is robbing a bank compared with founding a bank?
BERTOLT BRECHT, DIE DRIEGROSCHENOPER
SHARING AND GROWING THE PIE
In most of mankind, gratitude is merely
it secret hope for greater favours.
Duc DE LA ROCHEFOUCAULD , MAXIMES
Despite all my hard words about establishing ownership and caution where
partners are concerned, I am a great believer in sharing the annual pie
around. That is, I believe in incentives that help concentrate the mind and
bring a sense of competition and purpose to management.
What I do not believe in, are incentives handed over as a kind of sop (you
will find these everywhere) or in an owner sharing the proceeds of an asset
sale unless contractually bound to do so.
Use the annual profits of a company to grow the business by all means.
One of the ways of making it grow is to carefully craft bonuses for those  
who
work for you to achieve margin, cost and revenue targets. This is a great ideaeven if you are going short at the time yourself and your sales manager is
earning more than you are that year. Sounds crazy? Well, it worked for me!
But when it comes to a sale, when you cash in your asset for  big bucks,
then I dispute the necessity (or even the fairness, not that life is fair) of hand-
ing over substantial chunks of the big bucks to people who did not risk their
cash or livelihoods to create the business.
Handing over a substantial portion of the proceeds from the sale of an
asset to employees makes no logical sense. Almost certainly the people now
working for an asset sold by you will continue in their employment under a
new owner. If not, they will be compensated - the law, not to mention
common decency, ensures it. Why then would you want to hand them a  
wind-
fall? You're not responsible for motivating them any more. The new owner  
is.
Gratitude? Don't make me laugh. I have had many, many employees
whom my company encouraged and groomed over several years suddenly
leave my company for a wonderful position elsewhere. Often without a
second thought. Nor did I blame them one iota.
To the contrary, I am proud, as proud as Lucifer, that we have been able
to offer them the opportunity to grow and excel and build their skills to the
point that they have been poached by a rival. Why would I not be?
Dennis Publishing alumni litter the senior management offices of my
rivals. I love them all. I'm proud of them. And many of them are rather fond
of the 'Bearded Dwarf', my nickname among them. But neither they, nor
their ex-colleagues still at my company, deserve a piece of the asset pie.
So am I just an ingrate? Is this 'the unacceptable face of capitalism'? I
don't believe so. Employees work for a salary. That salary is guaranteed.  
They
are also awarded pension contributions from their company and, in some
instances, health care and other perks. They risked nothing but a small poten-
tial embarrassment when they applied for the job in the first place. They are
not owners. The financier John Paul Getty put it best half a century ago:
The meek shall inherit the earth, but not the mineral rights,
Exactly. Risk equals reward. 'An honest day's work for an honest day's pay'
is not risk-taking.
If you work in my mine, I'll pay you fairly, try to make it a great mine to
work in, incentivise you if it makes sense for the company to do so,contribute to your pension, perhaps contribute to your health care and the
health care of your family, teach you to grow your skills and thereby  
improve
your personal net worth, ensure you have paid vacations, ensure you are not
bullied or in any way discriminated against, and concern myself with your
personal safety at work.
I will do all these wonderful things in a thoughtful and consistent
manner. BUT I WILL NOT SHARE OUT THE PIE WITH YOU WHEN
I SELL THE MINE AND ITS MINERAL RIGHTS. Fair enough? If you
don't think it's fair, please take a job somewhere else. I accept that that is
why I am rich and you are not. But that is how the system under which we
labour is constructed. If you want to change it, go into politics. (You won't
change it there, either, but that's another story.)
There are exceptions, of course. Important exceptions.
Very senior managers who turned down attractive offers from elsewhere
to stay with the company and grow it, perhaps. Very long-term employees.
Key employees who made a crucial difference to the viability and growth of
the particular asset about to be sold. They should certainly be considered  
for
a piece of the asset-sale pie, but generosity should be tempered with the facts
set out above concerning risks and rewards. And they cure facts, you know.
What about incentives from annual profits offered to senior employees?
They are absolutely necessary, but they represent a problem which has vexed
me all my business life. I do not think I have ever got it right. Your aim, as
an owner, is simple: it is to improve management efficiency, productivity and
frugality, and thereby improve future profits while still encouraging growth.
But the balance is crucial, and many managers attempt to reach their
targets simply by cutting costs. This can be fatal.
Any fool can cut costs anywhere at any time. For one shining moment it
will look as if he or she is a genius at increasing the bottom line. Then the
moment will pass (unless the cuts were from an excessively fat cow) and  
qual-
ity will collapse. Keeping costs down is vital in almost any business except
government (how I wish I owned a government) but it should not be the
main focus of senior managers.
Instead, the balance between annual profit and investment for future
growth is the key. Revenues versus costs is important, but the latter shouldnot be cut merely to meet management bonus targets.
There is also a truth that is antithetical to the tenor of this book. For
whatever reason, a surprising number of first-class employees (managers or
otherwise) are not overly motivated by money. They want security, or
respect, or the chance to learn or the opportunity to shine. Often they
require little more than a decent salary in a company where they feel moti-
vated and valued.
You and I, on the other hand, for the purposes of this book, are greedy
little sods solely bent on the pursuit of wealth. We must be very careful not
to load our own sins on the shoulders of the innocents described in the last
paragraph. They are what the English call 'the salt of the earth'.
You won't get far if you attempt to financially 'incentivise' the salt of the
earth. Praise, the ability to discern when a good job has been done and the
courtesy to say so, fairness, integrity and camaraderie should be employed
instead. It takes more trouble than mere bribery, but it produces wonder-
ful results.
There are arguments to the contrary, too, about any thought or consid-
eration of the financial reward that ownership and keeping most of the pie
brings in its wake. Most of them come from the central tenets of world reli-
gions - organisations whose assets and resources rival that of many multina-
tional corporations, it might be added. Even so, these religions have been
credited in the past, rightly or wrongly, with carrying the flame of eternal
truths, truths that men are apt to forget from generation to generation. Let's
take a brief look at their attitude towards gathering wealth.
Take the Bible first. In Matthew 19, v. 26 we learn, in words taken
directly from the Son of the God of Christians, that: 'It is easier for a camel
to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the king-
dom of God.' Pretty strong stuff when you consider the alternative on offer
in the Old Testament.
Or again, from Matthew: 'Lay not up to yourself treasures upon earth,
where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and
steal. But lay up for yourself treasures in heaven.'
Stirring words, but for many hundreds of years it was taught that one
way for a man to lay up 'treasures in heaven' for himself was to give money
to the Catholic church. The more you gave, the more you were likely to
be saved - and to hell with the widow's mite, was the cry of Christian bish-
ops then. (Bishops, in those days, lived like kings. Archbishops lived likeemperors. I do not think it would be wise for me to comment about those
higher up the chain, although the evidence is there for those who wish to
read it.)
And again, in the Bhagavad Gita, a Hindu holy poem from a religion
which was old before the coming of any Jewish prophet, we read: 'Set thy
heart upon thy work but never upon its reward. Work is not for a reward:
but never cease to do thy work.' Just as the Devil can quote scripture for his
own purposes, this might cynically be viewed as a more beautiful rendering
of the old canard: 'I never meant to get rich. I just did what I love doing and
I got rich by accident.' But I will not say so. It is difficult to comprehend
meaning down the long centuries.
If I were writing a book about how to be happy, then I would recom-
mend much to you along the same lines. Love of any work, diligently under-
taken, no matter what it is, brings contentment and, eventually, respect. But
it will rarely bring you riches. And that is what you are reading this book for,
is it not?
In the Koran, too, and in Taoism and scores of other religions or
philosophies there are warnings about the very attitudes extolled in this
book. Even today, the morality tales at the heart of Hollywood films like
Wall Street, and many others, warn against greed. They warn with a wink, it
is true; but they warn just the same.
So is it worth it? Should we pursue the Pie at all?
This is not a question for me to consider here at any length. I have
become a poet, a serious one, too, and I wrestle with such questions every-
day in the three hours I put aside to write verse. But you are not to consider
this. You are to consider that I might well be a hypocrite, because I took to
writing poetry after I had 'laid up my treasure' on earth.
I have wasted vast amounts of my life 'laying up treasure'. I have exiled
myself for months at a time to plunder the riches of the USA and to bring
them back to Europe. Many are the nights I lay awake in my New York
apartment, listening to the eerie sirens and street sounds which define that
great city, while I dreamed of spring in an English country garden thousands
of miles away.
Let's pause, just for moment, to consider how I came to regard that trek
in hindsight and in sonnet form:
Prodigal SonOften I ventured in Babylon's towers,
Never a friend I met — never a one,
Playing the part of the prodigal son.
Many the weeks and many the hours,
Barely a moment to think of the flowers
Patiently budding in Warwickshire's air.
Never a thought of a snapdragon there,
Or May on the hedge. All of my powers
Spent upon gilding the lilies of gain,
While blue-eyed forget-me-nots lowered their gaze,
Their beauty unmourned in an English lane.
Yet now, as I lie amidst Babylon's maze,
Decked in the trappings of fabulous dross,
By the sirens of night, I weep for their loss.
Well, I can weep all I want. Not a moment of those long, long years worship-
ping Mammon can be brought back. Just as I cannot bring back the dead
forget-me-nots from past spring days I never saw.
Does it matter if I now own the lane, or half of the county for that
matter? Or that it was purchased with treasure brought back from across the
Atlantic after years of sweat? You might want to think about that.
But don't think too long if you want to get rich.
PROTECTING THE P I E
The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
All on a summer day:
The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
And took them quite away!
LEWIS CARROLL, ALICE'S ADVENTURES  IN WONDERLAND
Sooner or later someone is going to try to steal your pie. This will not be
unfair. You almost certainly set out to steal someone else's in the first place
and may well, to some degree, have succeeded. There is very little that is new
under the sun and the supply of pie is not infinite.
But enough of philosophy, already. Here comes another wannabe or a
great big corporation. They like the look of what you've been baking in the
kitchen, and decide to bake something very similar. They want to put you
out of business.What to do? First let's take a look at the nature of rivalry and competi -
tion in a capitalist society.
'Competition is all that makes capitalism bearable.' Without rigorous
competition, all forms of Western-based societies would soon be ruled, not
by parliaments or their equivalent, but by fat, bloated and impregnable
monopolies. (Some would argue they already are.) You wouldn't like it
much. People of my age and older have personal experience of it.
You think I'm joking? Obviously you're not old enough to remember
the days before rationing ended. Or the days before Freddie Laker intro-
duced the concept of cheap air travel. British Airways and their American
cousins ruled the roost at the time, and charged whatever the hell they
wanted to charge for you to fly. They had virtually no competition. You paid
up, or you stayed grounded,
Or perhaps you cannot recall when the GPO (the General Post Office),
was in charge of telephone communications - which were then hived off to
British Telecom in a bogus 'public-flotation'. They, too, had no competitors.
'You'd like a new phone in your flat? Certainly, madam. That will be loads-
a-money up front and we'll come to install it at our convenience - shall we
say in four months?' Four months if you were lucky, that was. And if you
didn't complain.
Britain in the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s and much of the 1980s was ruled by
a combination of monopolistic, undemocratic unions who spent all day arm-
wrestling with a bunch of monopolistic, undemocratic nationalised indus-
tries. British citizens never got a look in. The word 'customer' was alien to
almost everyone involved, except what was left of 'private industry'.
Around the world, by friend and foe alike, the UK was called the 'Sick
Man of Europe', and that's exactly what we were. All because so much
competition had been sucked out of the country by the creation of monop-
olies, which, if they were not owned by the government, were regulated by
them to the point of virtual control.
I have little time for many of Margaret Thatcher's policies. By my lights
she was a warmonger and a damn sight too full of herself. But she smashed
the union's grip on Britain's economy and helped create a climate in which
denationalisation of major industries became the cry for Socialist, Liberal and
Conservative alike. And if you don't like my reading of history, ask Tony
Blair. He'll tell you much the same, although his words will be softer and
altogether more prudent.She did not reduce taxes fast enough. And she did not listen to anyone
except her 'inner voices' concerning Europe, pensions, red tape, bureaucracy,
the health service and a hundred and one other things. But I, and many thou-
sands like me, will always be grateful to the old handbag for bringing the 
sweet
aroma of competition back to what, after all, is a nation of shopkeepers.
I am a Labour man born and bred. I will die voting Labour. It's a tribal
thing. It's plain stupid. But I still believe (well, just) that 'the inch of differ-
ence', as my friend Richard Neville put it, 'between the Conservative and
Labour party, is the inch in which my friends and I live'.
Even so, that lack of competition nearly ruined Britain. It wasn't entirely
Labour's doing - much of it had to do with the loss of markets and lack of
capital following the devastation of World War II. But it brought us to the  
edge
of an abyss from which I doubt we would have crawled out in my lifetime.
Thatcher dragged us back from that brink, and nobody knows that better than
the current Labour administration. Aftes all, they stole many of her and John
Major's policies, and made them their own. Very successfully, too.
Now that's how to handle competition!
Competition isn't some misty-eyed concept that should be confined to
students of the 'dismal science', Economics. Competition is the heart, soul,
liver, lungs and kidney of the beast we call Western capitalism. How you
react to it, how you face up to it, defines whether you can stay rich, and
probably whether you can get rich at all.
I'm a fighter. My natural reaction to provocation in business, as in life, is
to attack. But this basic instinct has led me astray many times, and I have
learned to think a little more carefully before tearing into the enemy with
fangs bared. Let's take an example.
At the beginning of the 1990s, my company owned more than half of
the personal computer magazine titles in the UK. We were making a small
fortune. Most importandy we owned a brute called Computer Shopper (we
still do), one of the only magazines in Europe which clocked in one  
thousand
pages of advertising in a good issue. This was a magazine worth defending.
My biggest rival in Britain was the Dutch company VNU, headed up by
Graeme Andrews, the chap who had masterminded VNU's purchase of  
PCW
magazine from Dennis Publishing in 1982.I was contacted by Ziff Davis, a powerfull magazine-publishing company
based in Park Avenue, New York City. Ziff Davis was owned by one of the
finest magazine publishers who ever lived, Bill Ziff, and he wanted to talk to
me on the telephone. I had met Bill a few times, and had sold him the
American edition of MacUser in 1986, a magazine I'd launched in the USA
with my partners, Peter and Bob.
Everyone had done well out of the deal, not least because Bill had
persuaded me to spend a year babysitting MacUser in New York after  
selling
it. He had achieved that feat by offering to increase the sale price substan-
tially if we hit ambitious targets. I had hit them, all right - there was a lot of
money involved. Close to $20 million.
But that had been a few years back. Our conversation went something
like this:
'Hello, Felix.'
'Hi Bill.'
'How are you:'
'Very well, thanks. What's up?'
So far so breezy. Being breezy with Bill is like whistling in the dark when
you know there's a ravenous Doberman somewhere in the vicinity. It does-
n't do any good, but it makes you feel slightly better. His answer was chill-
ingly courteous.
'We're coming to Europe, Felix. Soon.'
'Oh.'
'I thought that at least I should let you know,'
'Great, Bill. We'll do lunch, Japanese for you, isn't it?'
'No, that's not what I meant.'
'Oh.'
'I meant that we are going to launch PC magazines in Europe.'
'Which magazines, Bill?''Two of them to start."
'Where, Bill?'
'I think you can guess, Felix.'
'Oh.'
The conversation was downhill all the way from there. This was a catas-
trophe of terrifying proportions. I knew that. And Bill knew that I knew. It
ended roughly as follows;
'I think we should talk, Felix.'
'Sure.'
'We would like to buy your company. Or at least 51 per cent of it."
'Oh;
'You could be involved, with us launching in France, Germany and Britain.'
'Uh-huh.'
'You could even head it up,'
'Uh-huh.'
'I'll have Phil call you, Felix. 1
'Sure.'
'Do think carefully about our proposal, Felix.'
'Sure.'
'Together, we could conquer Europe in the PC magazine business.'
'I'll think it about it, Bill,'
It was about all I did think about for the next year or two.
So that's how lives are altered. One phone call. A conversation that
would have meant nothing except to those in the personal computer publish-
ing business. To me, it meant the world crashing down about my ears.
It was flattering, but it meant ruin, of a kind, if I sold 51 per cent to Ziff
Davis. It meant loss of independence. It meant that if I agreed, and Bill or
his CEO called me up on a Monday morning and asked me to pee in the
blue urinal that week, then I would have to pee in the blue urinal. I wouldbe transformed into a hired gunslinger, trampling over Europe, swamping
rival computer magazine publishers with launches of high-quality product
backed by huge investment.
I would become something like a travelling salesman. A very rich travel-
ling salesman, true. But still a salesman. A hired gun.
But what choice did I have? Bill Ziff is not a bluffer. If he said he was
coming, then he was coming. Soon. If I spurned Phil's advances (Phil was
one of Bill's senior legal advisors) then I was toast.
Because Ziff Davis in those days were the best. Simply the best publish-
ers of PC periodicals in the world. If I was a fox, they were a tiger. And a
tiger with huge amounts of money to call upon from their American invest-
ment-banker buddies. If they launched competing magazines against me in
Britain, it would be like Russia invading the Isle of Wight. All over before
it began.
Or would it?
Britain is not America. Britain has only sixty million souls compared to
North America's three hundred million. British advertising agencies were
insular, awkward, cantankerous and nothing like the suavely dressed pond-
life I lunched with on the east and west coasts of America.
Costs were higher in Britain for printing and paper. Salaries were cheaper.
As we have seen, newsstand sales were more important than subscriptions,
unlike in America. Margins were smaller. The balance of revenues between
advertising and sales of copies was reversed. Advertisers tended to pay less
per thousand readers per page; much less. Budgets were tighter. We drank
warm beer. And we didn't do power breakfast meetings.
Europe was a different environment. Ziff Davis would probably think
that Britain (and Germany and France) were just mini-versions of the USA.
They would be utterly wrong. And it would take them time to find that out.
Time would cost them money. How much money were they willing to lose?
Maybe there was a chance. To fight. To prove I was better than them,
better than anyone, in my own backyard. Maybe it wasn't totally hopeless.
But I needed allies. And I needed money. So I did what I never did, I got
down on my belly and squirmed over to see my rival, VNU, who had a fancy
office building several blocks away in Soho.
Here was money - VNU were a public company. Here was international
clout. And VNU didn't like Ziff Davis. In fact, one got the impression theypositively disliked them. And the enemy of my enemy is my friend.  
Especially
when my enemy is on the attack with his dagger at my throat.
Now VNU are a decent bunch. Most Dutch people are decent. That's
stereotypical, maybe, but it's always been my experience of them. Good
negotiators, good traders and nearly all straight arrows. But if I was a fox and
Ziff Davis was a tiger, then what was VNU? VNU was a woolly mammoth.
It was so big it didn't bother with animals that kept away from it. In a snow-
storm, the fox could probably snuggle in downwind of the mammoth,
providing it behaved itself.
Dennis Publishing and VNU got on in Britain. We poached each other's
staff (mostly, I poached theirs) and made orangutang breast-beating noises
to advertisers. But, quite honestly, the two companies liked and respected
each other. And I especially liked their CEO, Graeme Andrews.
I filled Graeme in on the news. (I suspect he had already heard.) He was
concerned. Very concerned. VNU was a huge company in Holland and had
a growing worldwide business. They were bigger than Ziff Davis. Ziff could
never buy them, and would probably never want to buy them. But the tiger
could damage them in Britain and elsewhere. It would be a bloody fight and
no quarter asked. So we talked, Graeme and I.
A public company has to be careful. It cannot make alliances like private
companies can. There are a million ways it can fall foul of the laws govern-
ing the governance of public companies. Graeme could not exactly promise
me that VNU would join with Dennis to see the invading tiger off, but he
could suggest various hypothetical scenarios and leave the rest to silence  
and
a raised eyebrow.
I got busy. VNU got busy. I turned down Bill's offer, and I believe that
Bill was a little mystified by that decision. Together, but without colluding
(honest!) we fought Ziff Davis on the beaches, on the landing grounds, in
the fields and in the streets, in the hills, in the offices of advertising agencies
and on the newsstands of Britain.
Ziff Davis were game. They kept coming. They threw millions of dollars,
then more millions at their British beach head. It was awe-inspiring. They
poached our columnists and our editors in droves. They paid a fortune to
their staff and rented fabulous office space down by the river. Sales  
incentives
were juicy. Their staff car park looked like an automobile show, the modelswere so new. All that was missing were the girls in bikinis.
They wined and dined even tiny advertisers. They flew a half-page
Computer Shopper advertiser down from Scotland, with his wife, and took
them both to the opera! British publishers had never seen anything like it. It
was the American Way writ large in a country one quarter the size of  
Texas.
I worked as I hadn't worked in years. Together with Alistair Ramsay, my
managing director, and the entire Dennis computer publishing team, I used
every dirty trick and stratagem I could think of to attack the Ziff juggernaut.
We nearly had nervous breakdowns. And we spent money like water to take
the fight to them. We would not give in.
And we won. Eventually, they folded their tents and drifted away into the
night. The combined forces of VNU and Dennis, with a teensy bit of help
from EMAP and my friend Chris Anderson at Future, saw the buggers off.
But at what cost?
At the cost of two years' entire profits, my friends. Two years' profits is
what it cost us to defeat Bill Ziff. Not just the profits from Computer  
Shopper.
But from the whole company. And today, knowing what I know today,
would I still have done it?
No. Absolutely not. It was stupid. Glorious, but stupid.
I would have listened more closely to Phil and Bill. I would have negoti-
ated my balls off. I would have become 'the enemy', and I would have led the
charge to rip the limbs from any bastard who stood in the way of Ziff Davis
Dennis in Europe. That was going to be the name of the company: Ziff
Davis Dennis, ZDD.
That's what I should have done. It doesn't pay to be a hero. But am I
glad we did it. Yes, I'm glad. Because I proved that my own people, with
their backs against the wall, facing an enemy with superior firepower and
massive confidence, could be slowed, stopped and, finally, beaten. It was
exhilarating. But it was ultimately a pyrrhic victory. If my memory serves me
right, either VNU or EMAP ended up with the remnants of Ziff Davis's two
magazine launches. So what?
I'm in this business to get rich, aren't I. So what did I do it for? Was it
because Bill had assumed I would be his junior partner? Was it because I
secretly desired to prove that, in the UK anyway, I was as good as everyone
said his organisation was? Because the approaches from his people thatfollowed our conversation assumed I would take their wonderful offer (and
it was a wonderful offer). Did that rankle a little? Subconsciously?
I don't know now. Too much water under the bridge and wine through
the arteries. But I do know I would have been a richer man if I had joined
with Bill and run with the tiger as his jackal. I'm certain of it.
 And what of the competition you will be facing? What do I think I know
that might be of use? I know that you must dodge more bullets than you try
to catch. I know that competitors can be a source of inspiration as well as
irritation. And I know that it is a foolish fox that attacks a woolly mammoth,
except by stealth, in the dead of night, when calves are born. I know keep-
ing your head down doesn't always work. And I know your competitors will
keep you honest.
My advice on competition is always to ensure that you want to fight, and
ought to fight on a larger competitor's ground. If he is anxious to buy you,
determined to park his tanks on your lawn, maybe you should let him. For
the right price.
If your competitor is smaller, try to hire him or buy him or join with him.
If he won't budge, take drastic action and smash him. If that won't work,
then learn to be friends and collude against the woolly mammoths together.
But don't fight tigers, my friend. Not if you want to get rich.
TWENTY-ONE WAYS TO MAKE MORE PIE
It is not that pearls fetch a high price became men have
dived for them. On the contrary, men dive for
them because they fetch a high price.
RICHARD WHATELY, ENGLISH PHILOSOPHER AND THEOLOGIAN
INTRODUCTORY LETTERS  ON POLITICAL  ECONOMY
Here is what I have learned as far as owning, sharing and growing your
annual pie is concerned. None of this should be written in stone. The way I
got rich and shared (and continue to share) my annual pie may not suit you
or your own circumstances. That said, I suspect some of the points that
follow are universal truths:
1 Make annual bonuses generous.  If you want your managers to concen-
trate on improving margin and profitability while growing the business, then
they have to feel the light is worth the candle. Pay them well for performing
well. (They will have many excuses to make to their lovers or spouses forworking late to achieve the goals you set them.)
2. 'Ring fence' investment costs from 'ongoing' business.  You want  
the
business to grow but you also want to make profits. Balance is the key. By
'ring fencing' all investment money for new projects and growth in your
annual accounts, you can encourage managers to work on margin and profit
from their 'ongoing' parts of the business while offering them the chance to
grow and take some risk. This equation requires patience and goodwill on all
sides. But it can be done, and it works,
3.Keep costs down.  Always. 'Overhead walks on two legs' and will eat you
out of house and home. No company, new or old, can avoid 'Stealth' growth
in overhead. It occurs, as it were, by osmosis. Prune overhead regularly. Stop
only when the pips squeak.
4.Never delegate bonus arrangements.  I once did so, like a fool, and
twelve months later my company was forced to pay ludicrously high bonuses
for a very small improvement in profit to six senior managers. Four of them
voluntarily returned half of their bonuses. They knew they were not equi-
table. The other two insisted on keeping their bonuses. Neither of those two
managers works for me today, or will ever work for me again. But it was my
fault. I had delegated a task to them I should not have delegated.
5.At senior level, insist on collective responsibility for bonuses.  Part  
of
the annual incentive bonus for senior managers should result from their
combined efforts to bring home the bacon. One cannot make a senior
manager's whole bonus rest on this edifice. But peer pressure is a powerful
force. If senior managers sense one of their number is slacking and fear they
may all suffer for his or her transgressions, they are likely to let their  
feelings
be known. Forcefully.
6.Praise excellent work.  But do not waste your praise on ho-hum perform-
ances as a sop. Employees respect a boss who knows the difference between
the mundane and the exceptional. Remember that not all employees  
respond
well to incentive bonuses or a dangled carrot of any kind. They seek recog-
nition, not bribery.
7.Fire malingerers, incompetents, toads and glory hounds mercilessly.
Not only does firing them make you feel better and contribute to a more
pleasant working atmosphere, it cheers up the whole staff.8.Turn a cold eye on company 'perks'.  These can add up to huge sums.
While I am considered terribly old-fashioned on this subject, I am still uneasy
about company-issued credit cards; company-issued mobile telephones;
travel and entertainment of any stripe at the company's expense; company air
travel in any class but economy.
9.Avoid all 'jollies',  the generic British term for flying the sales team to
Florida in winter to 'boost morale' and issue tub-thumping speeches, all of
which are forgotten the second the crew hit the beach. You can't afford
'jollies'. Ignore protestations from sales managers to the contrary. A day set
aside in a quiet environment, prepared for carefully, to assist sales teams
improve their presentations to clients, is sensible. As is sales training from
reputable training agencies.
10.Offer legal perks that you have paid for yourself to employees.  This
sounds crazy, but it works. I allow my employees, for example, the use of my
Rolls-Royces or Bentleys for their weddings. I permit them to stay at my
homes around the world if they have performed well. I send every child born
to an employee (well, I used to in the early days - there are too many of them
now) a massive soft toy. Such perks are legal because I paid for them myself
from after-tax dollars or pounds.
11.Set an example. If, as an owner, yon want fancy furniture in your office or
works of art or Persian rugs, then bloody well pay for them yourself. How can
you expect frugality when a junior manager, who works in a cubicle, comes to
visit you, knowing that the company paid for those accessories? There is noth-
ing wrong with them being there. It's who paid for them that counts.
12.Encourage senior managers to go over annual results with you one-
on-one.   You  will learn more from  off-the-cuff remarks  and  opinions
expressed at one-on-one meetings while looking over financial results than
you will in a dozen board meetings. This tactic never fails to produce food
for thought, often on both sides.
13. Back up your managers. With delegation comes responsibility. Back up
your managers, in public, whenever and wherever you have to. If they do not
perform, speak seriously in private to them. If they still do not perform, fire
them. But do not undercut them or engage in meetings that appear to
undercut them. Reprimand other managers who bad-mouth their peers.
Nearly everyone's ego and self-confidence is more fragile than the outside
world believes.
14.Search out and promote talent.  Talent comes in all shapes and sizesand is often inarticulate and shy. Talent isn't necessarily the woman in the
Calvin Klein suit who talks-the-talk and bamboozles meetings with stunning
graphics on her PowerPoint presentation. Talent is often to be found dressed
in T-shirts down in the lower reaches of your organisation. Set a bounty on
talent among managers. When you find it, test it. Groom it. Work it until it's
ready to drop. Load it with more work and responsibilities. Praise it. Reward
it. It will make you loads-a-money.
15.Interview your rivals' talent.  I have never known a single person in a
rival organisation, however well paid or cosseted, who has refused to meet
me for a quiet drink after work. I have discovered more about what my rivals
are up to in this manner than any other. In addition, I have often been so
impressed with the people I met in this way that I poached them later. No
intelligence-gathering exercise is ever entirely wasted in business. There is
only so much pie. Talent bakes that pie.
16.Discourage secrecy.  The more you take middle and senior managers
into your confidence, the more they will respect you and the harder they will
work for you. Many managers disagree with this policy. They love the feel-
ing of power that comes from knowing what others do not know. I don't
care about power, I care about getting rich.
17.Save a little bit of pie for suppliers.  Save a little of the annual pie to
wine and dine key suppliers. Or let them wine and dine you. If you like them
enough, invite them to your home. We all remember to call often upon our
major customers. But it is worth remembering suppliers. And they often
have important market information.
18.Never bad-mouth rivals. It's a sign of stupidity and weakness. I try to go
out of my way to praise my rivals when I can. Often enough they deserve praise
and they're sure to learn about my comments sooner or Later. Why go out of
your way to antagonise them? (Secretly feeling sorry for them, because they do
not own as much of their own company as you do, is definitely permitted.)
19.Sell early.  Real money rarely come from horsing around running an
asset-laden business if you are an entrepreneur. You are not a manager,
remember? You are trying to get rich. Whenever the chance comes to sell an
asset at the top of its value, do so. Things do not keep increasing in value for
ever. Get out while the going is good and move on to the next venture.
More money is usually lost holding onto an asset than is made waiting for
the zenith of its value. I should know - it's my own biggest defect.20.Enjoy the business of making money.  The loot is only a marker. Time
cannot be recaptured. There is no amount of pie in the world worth being
miserable for, day after day. If you find you dislike what you are doing, then
sell up and change your  life. Self-imposed misery is a kind of madness. The
cure is to get out.
21. Never miss an opportunity to promote your asset. Try purchasing
one (or both) of my books of poetry: A Glass Half Full or Lone Wolf for
instance. If they are not in your local bookstore, then go to www.felixden-
nis.com and check them out. Each contains a spoken-word CD and may well
transform your entire life. (Sorry, I just couldn't resist that.)
1 5
THE POWER
OF FOCUS
The vulgar thus through imitation err;
As oft the learned, by being singular;
So much they scorn the crowd, that if the throng
By chance go right, they purposely go wrong.
ALEXANDER POPE, 'AN ESSAY ON CRITICISM''
FOCUS ON KEEPING YOUR EYE ON THE BALL
I have been very poor the greater part of my life, and have borne it as
well, I believe, as most people, but I can safely say that 1 have been
happier every guinea I have gained. SYDNEY SMITH
It was Alexander Pope who wrote the immortal lines concerning learning,
and how a little of it 'is a dangerous thing'. Much the same could be said
about certain people's behaviour following even the most modest success. It
blinds them.
As it blinded me, on so many occasions that I am loath to dredge them
from my memory. But dredge them I shall. What happens? One makes
a little money by scoring a lucky goal, and suddenly you aspire to become
a god of soccer - the next Pele or Georgie Best or Diego Maradona. You
lose focus.
What is it you are attempting to achieve here? You are trying to become
rich. This must be the main focus of your business life. Becoming rich. Not
becoming one of the world's most famous athletes, or taking on RupertMurdoch in the newspaper publishing and television business, or having
your name appear a thousand times when you type it into a Google search.
You want to get rich. And you want to do it legally and as quickly as
you can.
That is what we are supposed to be about. Unfortunately, as John Lennon
pointed out, our lives are 'what happen while we're busy making other plans'.
And that is precisely what happened to me and a great many other people I
know. We forgot we were supposed to concentrate on getting rich and
concentrated, instead, upon excelling in the first sphere we succeeded in.
Why am I a magazine publisher? Is it because I love magazines? No. It's
because I had a tiny success back in 1967 selling a hippy magazine on
London's Fashionable King's Road. That's right. I discovered that at two
shillings and sixpence a time (half for me, half for the owner, Richard  
Neville),
I could earn more money than I could as an R&B drummer or a high-street-
store window dresser.
I even learned that by dressing up one or two girlfriends in the shortest
skirts they owned and instructing them to approach every guy under thirty
with a big smile and the following words: 'Hi! Have you got your copy of
OZ this month yet?' I could, triple my earnings. (Some wits might say that
having created the world's biggest men's lifestyle magazine, Maxim, I'm still
at the same old game. Well, let 'em say it.)
It was nothing unusual for me to return to Richard Neville's basement
flat in the King's Road days to divvy up the loot and discover a hundred
pounds in my satchel. A hundred pounds! In those days, nobody I knew had
ever earned a hundred pounds in a fortnight. I could earn it in a day or so.
And so I became a magazine publisher. That was OK, but I forgot to
keep my eye on the ball. The ball was to get rich. Instead, I decided to
become one of the world's best magazine publishers. Not smart.
Why wasn't it smart? It took me way too long, for one thing, and it cut
me off from more lucrative endeavours for another. I became a multi-
millionaire in 1982. By then I was thirty-five years old. Barmy! By thirty-
five
I was already half dead.
With my talents I could have been a multi-millionaire by the time I was
twenty-five or twenty-eight. All that was stopping me was my conviction
that I was a born magazine publisher. How stupid, I wasted eight or nineyears when I could have been drinking Petrus, swilling down Retsina and
lager instead.
The truth is I led myself to believe I had fallen in love with publishing.
That wasn't a tragedy in itself, but I allowed my liking for the magazine
publishing business to bunker me from so many other avenues where I could
have coined cash.
If you have entrepreneurial flair, then you can go into just about any
business and make money. But instead of rushing to where the money was,
I kept on digging in the relatively poor pit of ink-on-paper until the money,
reluctantly, came to me.
This is so important, gentle reader. It pains me to think about it. If you
wish to become rich, look carefully about you at the prevailing industries
where wealth appears to be gravitating. THEN GO TO WHERE THE
MONEY IS! That is where you should focus your efforts. On the ball
marked 'The Money is Here.'
Let us say I had done something worthwhile with my life, which I have
good reason to doubt, and had raised a son or daughter. Would I allow either
of them to go into the magazine business today? You must be joking.
What is the magazine, business? It is a business where our main, activity is
chopping down millions and millions of trees, flattening the pulp and print-
ing hieroglyphics and images on both sides of it. Then we send the end prod-
uct out in diesel-guzzling trucks to shops where perhaps 60 per cent of them
sell to customers. We then pile the remaining, unsold magazines into more
diesel-guzzling trucks and take them to a plant where they are either
consumed as fuel, buried or shredded, or used to make cardboard boxes for
refrigerators. That's the magazine business.
Does this sound to you like a great business? Of course it isn't. Do you
imagine I would allow any grown child of mine to go into such a business?
Of course I wouldn't. The magazine business will have faded to a shadow of
its former glory within a decade or three. It is a mature business, and few
fortunes are made in mature industries, unless you are lucky enough to
create a monopoly in one. I was luckier than I knew.
So what businesses should I have gravitated towards? Computer soft-
ware, technology and dot com start-ups, cable and satellite television, prop-
erty, environmental waste clean-up, alternative energy services ... any one
of these might have created a much larger fortune for me in less time than
I took with magazines. Do I know anything about these industries? No.
But, then, I didn't know anything about magazines in 1967 either.So this is the first lesson in the power of focus. Keep your eye on the ball
if you wish to get rich. And do not forget which ball.
It's the one marked 'The Money is Here.'
TIMING
The time you won your town the race
We chaired you through the market-place;
Man and boy stood cheering by,
And home we brought you shoulder-high.
A. E. HOUSMAN, 'To AN ATHLETE DYING YOUNG'
There is no substitute for good timing. There is always luck involved, but it's
often the kind of luck you help make yourself.
With my friend Don Atyeo, I wrote two biographies many years ago. The
first one was about the martial artist and film star, Bruce Lee. We received a
pitiful advance from a very small firm in London called Wildwood House
run by a publisher of the old school, Oliver Caldecott. Oliver was a kindly
soul, and he thought he might just be able to sell a few thousand copies of
what would be the first biography written about Bruce Lee. Lee was a cult
figure in Hong Kong and the UK at the time.
Don Atyeo and I were broke. We knew nothing whatever about kung-fu
and nothing about Bruce Lee. Neither of us were film buffs. Neither of us
had ever written a book before. Our only qualifications for this task were as
follows: 1) It was our idea. 2) We owned a typewriter each. 3) We had visited
Asia. 4) We were broke.
Our contract with Wildwood House gave Oliver rights to publish our
biography in Hong Kong, Britain, Canada, New Zealand and Australia. No
other territories were mentioned in his contract because it was inconceivable
that the book would ever be published or wanted in them.
Don and I buried ourselves in research. We visited Hong Kong (on a
shoestring budget) and got a lot of interview material (including, incredibly,
an interview with Bruce Lee himself), and then we sat down in my Soho flat
in London and began typing. Typing, rather than writing, would be the
operative description.
This was hack work of the most demeaning kind. But it was fun and we
needed the money. Then good timing arrived. Good timing for us, that is.Bruce Lee died suddenly and unexpectedly in Hong Kong in July 1973.
Overnight, he became a global superstar. And we had almost finished his
biography - the only biography then written about him.
The world erupted in Bruce Lee mania. His films began playing to
packed audiences in scores of countries. For a brief moment, he was the  
most
famous man on the planet. Most movies appeal only to movie-goers in one
or two continents, but Bruce Lee became a star not only in Europe and
North America, but in Africa, South America, India, Central America, the
Middle East and Asia.
At my request, Don leaped on a flight to Hong Kong. A flight we could
not afford. Oliver loaned us the money. There, Don got the lowdown from
the hospital where Lee had died, interviewed surgeons and nurses there and
went on to obtain interviews with Bruce Lee's mistress and minders and
pieced together what had happened on the night Lee died.
It was an explosive story, and all the more compelling because his death
was considered suspicious by many of his fans. Meanwhile, Lee's movie
company Golden Harvest, run by Raymond Chow, together with Lee's wife,
Linda, were concocting a smokescreen designed to protect the filmstar's
reputation. This was understandable (he had died in his mistress's apart-
ment) but rumours of criminal and even supernatural involvement in his
death swirled around Hong Kong.
Eventually, these rumours reached the outside world. The result was an
international media firestorm.
When famous people die, there are always rumours which coalesce into
conspiracy theories. It's just human nature. In Bruce Lee's case, this 
speculation
reached absurd levels and only served to heighten worldwide interest in his
movies. In the Western world, Don Atyeo and Felix Dennis, two hard-up
hippies living in a slum in central London, now became Bruce Lee 'experts'.
Hey! Compared to the hundreds of other journalists assigned to the
story from around the world, we were experts. No sooner had Don flown,  
out
of Hong Kong, interview tapes and photographs bulging in his luggage,
than a well-oiled machine rolled into place. Golden Harvest's machine. And
Mr Chow was one of the most powerful men in Hong Kong. The worldwide
media circus arrived too late.Journalists from newspapers in every capital city in the Western world
could find no one to interview. Lee's wife, his mistress, Betty Ting Pei, his
producers, his housekeepers, his drivers, his studio colleagues, the hospital
staff and anyone connected with Bruce Lee and his movie company
clammed up. Our timing had been perfect. We had slipped in and out
'under the radar'.
We finished the book in record time and Wildwood House published
Bruce Lee: King of Kung-Fu in the UK to the delight of legions of ecstatic
Bruce Lee fans. It went straight into the British non-fiction bestsellers list.
For the first rime, Wildwood House had a bestseller on their hands. And
Don and I had money in our pocket.
But there was far more money to come from this splendid piece of good
timing - unless you happened to be Bruce Lee. I realised I owned the rights
to our biography in many countries around the world - all of Europe, Africa,
Central and South America, the Middle East, most of Asia and, most
crucially of all, the USA. In addition, because my little company had
designed the book, we had the negatives and typesetting on hand. Together
with an old friend and lawyer, Andrew Fisher, as well as book agents Abner
Stein and Nat Sobel, I got busy.
The result was a river of coin flowing into Don's pockets, my pockets,
Andrew's pockets, the agents' pockets and my company's pockets from
foreign edition after foreign edition of our book. There were translations into
German, French, Italian, Portuguese, Dutch, Greek, Arabic, Spanish and a
host of others. It also meant I got to meet up with a hero of mine again, Jann
Wenner, who had founded Rolling Stone, the American music magazine.
Jann's book publishing division, Straight Arrow, bought the US rights.
The book there was re-designed by Jon Goodchild, the very man who had
taught me to design magazines in the early days of OZ in London, who was
now living in San Francisco. Bruce Lee: King of Kung-fu flew off the
shelves in North America. I'm told it was one of Straight Arrow's best-
selling books ever.
It was perched on Bruce Lee's metaphorical shoulders that I first tasted
real money and built my first successful business, including a raft of kung-fu
magazines and Bruce Lee commemorative mail-order items, masterminded
by my old school friend, Bruce Sawford. Bruce had a lot of experience in
mail order.
In the latter part of 1973 and through 1974, the post office delivered
more than one thousand sacks of mail to our ramshackle office. The postmen(there were no women delivering mail in those days) got so pissed off with
the number of sacks, they refused to carry them upstairs to our garret office
and dumped them in the hall. On a good day there would be six sacks. Each
sack would contain envelopes with postal orders, cheques or money worth
$10,000 or more. Every day.
Then more good timing. A television presenter ranted and raved on her
show on national UK television about one particular Bruce Lee commem-
orative item sold by my company. It was called the Bruce Lee Treasure Kit,
and she thought it poor value for money. In tones resembling the
announcement of the death of a family member (she was a sanctimonious
phony if you ask me) this showbiz hack removed each of the items from the
bag containing the Treasure Kit and showed them to the camera. There
were maybe eight items, including a membership card to the British Bruce
Lee Society, photographs, a couple of badges and stickers, and a bunch of
other stuff.
The next day, thousands more orders for the Treasure Kit came pouring
in our garret door. We actually went round to the post office ourselves and
helped the postmen lug them up the street on hand carts. In those sacks  
was
a small fortune, and I didn't want them lying around the post office sorting
rooms too long.
Here is the power of timing. Don and I were not great writers, although
we improved as time went by. We were not investigative journalists. My
company was a hole-in-the-wall operation barely capable of publishing a
series of pamphlets, let alone a stable of magazines. Wildwood House was
not a home of bestsellers. We were broke. We were inexperienced. And yet,
we made a ton of money.
Not everyone who wants to get rich is going to get lucky with their
timing. But what made the timing so good in our case? Three things, I think.
One was the blind luck of one of the fittest men in the world keeling over
and dying. (If you want to know what he died of, then buy a second-hand
copy of our book. And don't believe anyone else. We really did those inter-
views with the hospital surgeons and staff and so we didn't have to make tip
conspiracy nonsense concerning 'bad feng shui' and Triad plots.)
Secondly, we followed our instincts and we persisted with this mad idea,
despite our lack of experience or any credentials. But then, who did have the
credentials?Thirdly, we acted with extraordinary speed. We put ourselves in the right
places at the right time, and we never slowed down from the moment Bruce
Lee died. Within weeks, we had finished a book, sold lots of foreign
language editions, sold the US publishing rights, published a ton of maga-
zines, invented a lot of mail-order items and then manufactured and sold
them to tens of thousands of fans.
And what did it all add up to? It added up to focus, following a stroke of
luck in the shape of perfect riming.
What errors did I make? Plenty, I did not invent enough magazines and
I did not invent enough commemorative items early on. Within a year or
two, my company was organising 'Bruce Lee Memorial Conferences' and
even sending fans on 'Pilgrimage Tours' to Hong Kong with Cathay Pacific
airline. It was profitable business. But if I had managed to do those things
within six months, I would have made for more money.
What other errors? I did not write and publish another book. I had enough
material to have done so. I could easily have asked a couple of journalist friends
to ghost it for Don and me for a pittance. It would have been another best-
seller for sure. But, by then, I had fallen into a trap. I believed I was a biogra-
pher. I believed that our biography was a great biography. What nonsense.
What I should have done was published a book, with Wildwood House
or any other book publisher, called Who Killed Bruce Lee? And this time, I
should have insisted on having my company named as joint publisher. Such
a book, produced swiftly enough, would have sold millions of copies around
the world.
My errors came party from inexperience and partly from falling into the
trap that I mentioned earlier. They also came from lack of focus. I was allow-
ing my thoughts to wander towards expanding in new directions, mostly
magazines, while there was soil a cow in the shape of a new book bursting
with milk and waiting to be milked. That was a serious error. A loss of focus.
Who knows? Perhaps I will milk it one day, but it will never yield the
small fortune that would have resulted from a ghosted piece of exploitation
published in 1974.
FOCUS ON CREATING THE RIGHT ENVIRONMENT
I was the better at getting and keeping,
You were the better at spend and spend;I was the better at grubbing and heaping,
But who was the better man in the end?
Yes, who was the better man, my friend?
Who was the better man?
THE BETTER MAN'
You cannot get rich all on your own. No one can. You have to create, or
work within, the right environment.
Humans are a cooperative, if argumentative, race. If you were to be
boycotted by your immediate neighbours, if nobody would meet with you
or take your instructions or sell you anything or buy anything from you, you
could never make money. You cannot do it on your own. Getting rich is
mostly sleight of hand, but if you acquire no audience but a mirror, then
there is no illusion with which to get rich.
Paper money itself is an illusion. It is a promise from a man you will never
meet, who works for a bank you will probably never enter, who reports to a
government you do not control. A £50 note or $100 bill is just a piece of
paper with some fancy printing on both sides of it. And what is a credit card
but a small rectangle of plastic with which you promise to buy a watch, car,
a yacht or even a house?
When you bank or spend paper money or use a credit card, you do so as
an implied part of a collective illusion. You already subscribe to what Charles
Mackay once rightly called 'a popular delusion' or 'the madness of crowds'.
You cannot use such devices alone. Others must believe in them equally for
the magic to function.
When enough people share a short-lived delusion, vast sums of money
can be acquired overnight. The 'tulip mania' in Holland in the mid-seven-
teenth century was such a time. Tulips had been imported into Holland for
forty years before the madness hit. By 1635, a single tulip bulb was swapped
for a collection of valuable articles, which included the following:
O four tons of wheat
O  eight tons of rye
O a bed
O four oxenO eight pigs
O  a suit of clothes
O  two caskets of wine
O four tonnes of beer
O two tons of butter
O one thousand pounds of cheese
O a silver drinking cup
The current value of the above would be $50,000 or more. And this was for a
single tulip bulb! Fortunes were made or lost, especially the latter, when the
music stopped. Within a few years, a tulip bulb was worth less than a dollar in
today's money. Here is the wonder of collective short-term delusion writ  
large.
In the same way, it is almost impossible to build an individual fortune
without colleagues, confederates and one or two professionals on board. You
will need a lawyer, sooner or later. You will be a fool to set up in business
without a qualified accountant somewhere in the picture. You will need
others who believe in your idea or your talent to work with you and for  
you.
I suppose there is a 'James Bond' type scenario where an evil genius can
work with a computer hitched up to the internet and steal all the world's
money alone. But I doubt this is a part of your own game plan. In any case,
even the evil genius will need someone to guard the gold bars while he  
works
his evil on the computer, to make him the computer in the first place so that
he can be evil, invent the internet to allow his evil to spread, force millions of
others to use the internet as victims of his evil and hire minions to pump  
out
the evil lavatory when the evil sewage pipe blocks.
You see? You just can't do it on your own. You need to create an
environment.
This does not mean you require fancy offices and all the accoutrements.
Human capital is by far the most important element of your environment,
whether you are just starring up or deep into the game. By focusing hard on
obtaining that human capital you will vastly increase your chances of becom-
ing rich.Stupid people are easy to hire. The world is full of stupid people. Many
of them are extremely pleasant and will give you a lovely smile every morn-
ing. But such people will not add to your wealth. In the early days, you
should avoid them like the bubonic plague. What you need are clever,
cunning and adept people.
But why would clever, cunning and adept people work for a mug like
you? Simple. There are many clever, cunning and adept people who are risk
averse. You are not risk averse because you are dedicated to becoming rich.
Believe it or not, much, much cleverer people than you will come and work
for you if you ask them.
You don't believe me? Then I have obviously failed in this book. Do I
strike you as a particularly clever person? Right! I'm not a clever person and
I have just enough wit to know it. I never attended university and was tossed
out of my school before I had 'graduated', to use the American expression.
You do not need to be clever. You do not even need to be that adept.
You need only a little cunning and massive determination to become rich.
Providing you can pay much cleverer but risk-averse people properly, and
promote them and lead them in such a way that they are all rowing in the
same direction, they will sign on to your little ship. I guarantee that this is
true. I did exactly that.
Persuading them to join is not the problem, but separating the wheat
from the chaff is the hard thing. They look so much alike. This is where you
have to focus your energy and concentration.
Your employees, your colleagues, your suppliers and your customers are
all human capital. Choosing among them is an art form. Yet creating the
right environment in which money can be made is essential. I repeat, you
can't do it on your own.
It takes effort, experience, focus and skill. If you get it right, you will
become rich with an case that will astonish you and everyone who knows
you. If you get it wrong, you will be running round like a headless chicken
for a year or so and then you will be bankrupt.
And you will deserve to be.
FOCUS TIPS WHEN CHOOSING 'HUMAN CAPITAL'
Here are a few discoveries I have made over the years about staying focused
when choosing employees or suppliers.
O Never choose an important employee or a key supplier alone.  Get
others to interview them or talk to them as well, either with you or sepa-
rately. We are all far too fond of choosing those we instinctively like, those
we respect or believe are similar to ourselves. This is not a good thing. You
need the input of others to choose the right candidate, although the final
choice, in the early days, must be yours and yours alone.
O Go further than reading a person's references.  It's such a fag, such  
a
bloody nuisance, such a pain in the neck, to go well beyond the references
and CV you've received, isn't it? And yet it pays. Make an appointment with
a potential employee's last company or with a supplier's other customers. Go
and see someone there. Make nicey-nicey. Listen hard. You will discover
more about your potential employee or supplier in a few minutes in this way
than in hours of conversation with them.
You can even tell the prospective employee or supplier you have
done so if you wish. It cuts bullshit down to a minimum. And it shows, at
the same time, that you cared enough to go beyond a CV and the usual
references.
O Make notes. Speak little.  I'm terrible at this. Absolutely terrible. But
I've learned to try harder as the years have gone by. Your notes need not  
refer
in any way to what the potential employee or supplier is saying. It can be
gibberish. Or it can, more usefully, be your impressions of the person and
their responses. Have a series of questions handy to shoot out when they
grind to a halt. Then focus like mad on what your instinct and your  
intuition
is telling you - as well as your ears.
As to speaking little yourself, remember you are being interviewed, too.
It is impossible for the other side to tell that you are not as clever as they are
if you keep your mouth shut. 'Better to have the world suspect you a fool
than to open your mouth and put the matter beyond doubt,' as the old
saying has it.
It may appear rude to have initiated a conversation, as you have, and not
to make small-talk to fill in embarrassing silences. But you are not conducting
the conversation to be polite. You are conducting the conversation to get rich.
O Good suppliers respect attention to detail.  Don't hesitate to  
challenge
quotes or invoices - after you have done your homework. At the beginning  of
a relationship, everything will usually be hunky-dory. Later, hidden or unac-
ceptable costs may creep in. Challenge them. Constantly request quotes from
your supplier's rivals. Demand refunds if a supplier screws up, based not on  
the
cost of the goods or services, but the financial consequences of the screw-up.
(I've read acres of New Age rubbish about 'partnerships' between suppli-
ers and customers. That's what it is: rubbish. If I could only get rich by bank-
rupting every supplier I ever dealt with, then I would do it in a heartbeat. I
wouldn't feel good about doing it, but I'd do it. Getting rich isn't about
vendor-customer 'partnerships'. And anyway, I have found that good suppli-
ers respect a hard-nosed attitude providing it's logical and providing you pay
on time.)
O Pay employees well. Bonus better.  Even young children know what
you get when you pay peanuts. Monkeys! Your company's salaries must be
competitive.
Bonuses should be more than competitive, they should be tempting,
generous and based ruthlessly on meritocracy and delivery. That's the way to
get employees to really focus. You don't want people to apply to work for
you because of the salaries on offer - they should be driven by other desires.
But if a salary isn't commensurate with the market, potential winners will not
be able to afford to work for you. I made that error for some years before
changing my ways.
O Be alert for 'cross overs'.  Many times I have been interviewing some-
one for a job and realised that they are not suitable for the job in question.
However, the candidate would be perfect in another position in my
company. Never mind that that position is currently filled. (All positions in
your company, except your own, are temporary.)
These 'cross overs' occur often. Be alert for them. Nothing pleases a
candidate who has failed to get a particular job more than being contacted
some time later and offered a job out of the blue. It is like a vindication and
they will almost certainly say 'yes' if the job title and money matches or
exceeds their current position.
O Only hire winners.  There may or may not be such a thing as bad luck.
But whether it exists or not, it is certainly contagious! Hire winners or people
you believe will become winners. Fire whiners and moaners swiftly. That's
contagious, too. You are trying to create an environment where making
money is on everyone's mind most of the time. Losers and whiners usuallyhave other priorities.
O Ignore your prejudices, likes and dislikes.  Easy to say and hard to do.
Legally, you may not permit certain prejudices to colour your choice regard-
ing any candidate. This is not only good law, it's good sense. Some of the
most successful colleagues and employees who have worked with me and for
me over the years were not my personal cup of tea at the beginning.
Likes and dislikes should not come into it. Loyalty, effectiveness,
honesty, integrity and stamina are crucial. Cleverness and cunning can be
useful. Professionalism is vital. A desire to shine in the world is worth more
than a university degree. All of this is important. Who you like and don't like
is irrelevant. If an employee makes money for you, you'll get to like them
later, I promise.
O Promote from within when you can.  I recently had to hire a new CEO
for one of my companies. An old friend, an ex-CEO and chairman of one of
my rivals, Robin Miller, gave me a great piece of advice. He suggested that
an external candidate, a candidate from outside the company looking for a
senior position, had better be at least 30 per cent better than any internal
candidates to get the job.
Why? Because, he reminded me, you know all the faults of an internal
candidate - they may have worked for you for years. But external candidates
come to you free from errors made in the past. All you are faced with is an
impression at the meeting and a list of their achievements. Failures are not a
part of anyone's CV. It was good advice from Robin, and just tipped the
balance in my mind when I made my own final decision.
O Don't leave senior employees in any job too long.  If this happens, as
it has in my companies occasionally, it means you are not focusing on that
business. You will get the most out of any senior employee in their first year
or two in a new position. After that, they enter a 'comfort zone'.
Do you really want them to be comfortable? If a man or woman heads up
one of your companies and has been there too long, consider asking them to
create a new division or company for you. But do not leave them to quietly
go to seed - they will get bored and resign anyway, if they're any good.
FOCUS ON DOING AN OUTSTANDING JOB
Indeed the Idols I have loved so long
Have done my credit in this World much wrong;Have drowned my Glory in a shallow Cup,
And sold my Reputation for a Song.
EDWAXD FITZGERALD, THE RUBAIYAT OF OMAR KHAYYAM  OF NAISHAPUR
If on my deathbed I had only a very short time to pass on what wisdom
I have accumulated about getting rich to a son or daughter, then it would
be this:
Ownership Shall Re Half of the Law;
Doing an Outstanding Job Shall Be The Other Half.
There is no point in owning 100 per cent of a rubbish company. Whatever
it is you intend to do to get rich, get good at it. Hire people who are better
than you at it. Listen and learn and get better still at it.
Even if you produce garbage for morons to watch on television, make it
the most entertaining garbage out there. Even if you are nothing but a scum-
sucking, ambulance-chasing tort lawyer - the lowest form of pond-life that
walks on its hind legs - be the best scum-sucking ambulance-chaser in town.
The American gangster Al Capone is said to have shot a man who kept
brewing rotten beer for Capone's illegal beer-distribution racket during
Prohibition. His gang lieutenants didn't get it. The business was illegal
anyway. If a new supplier tried to muscle in with better beer, they would
murder him. What did it matter if the beer was crap? But Capone, who
would have become one of America's greatest businessmen if he had stayed
on the straight and narrow, knew better.
He knew that rotten beer makes rotten business. He refused to have his
name associated with rubbish. He expected Prohibition to be lifted eventu-
ally, and hoped to be the legal beer king of America. Of course, he never did
because he didn't pay his taxes and because he was a murderer and a vicious,
brutal killer.
Even so, I am ashamed to say that if the above story is true, then I admire
Capone for the sentiment, if not for his business methods. He was right
about the beer. Having read his autobiography, I found myself wishing he
had stayed out of the rackets and built his fortune legally. He had many of
the attributes of a world-class entrepreneur. I suspect he would have become
very rich indeed without having to resort to crime.
Why does it count? Why is it important to focus on doing an outstand-
ing job?Firstly, talent will flock to your company. Talented employees mean you have
more opportunities to make more money. Secondly, you will make fewer 
errors.
The quality of your management will see to that. Thirdly, it places a premium
on your assets and the worth of your business. That means you get richer 
faster.
Fourthly, it's simply more enjoyable - which means you will enjoy coining to
work and will spend more time focusing on doing an even better job.
So focus on your business, whatever it is. It represents what you are. It
should be a source of pride as well as a source of money. Being the best, or
at least striving to be, will speed up the process of getting rich. Trust me. I'm
the best damn magazine publisher in England. (Well, at least I strive to be!)
Focusing on doing an outstanding job is an important part of getting rich.PART FOUR
T R O U B L E -
SHOOTING
&  E N D G A M E1 6
WHOOPS!
Being young is greatly overrated.
Any failure seems so total. Later on,
you realise you can have another go.
MARY QUANT, FASHION DESIGNER.
AN OWNER'S GUIDE TO KNOWING WHEN
TO CUT AND RUN
And this is the law, I will maintain.
Unto my dying day, sir,
That whatsoever king shall reign,
I will be the Vicar of Bray, sir!
TRADITIONAL ENGLISH FOLK-SONG
I do not believe the words 'a patient man' would necessarily spring to the
lips of those who know me superficially. 'Irascible' would be more likely.  
But
I can be as patient as the next man, and a great deal more so, when it comes
to projects I believe will make me money.
Still, not all things work out. Nor do most of us have the time or the
inclination to conduct a full autopsy on what went wrong. Past failures are
not pleasant to contemplate. But if you intend becoming wealthy by owning
a company or some similar entity, then, sooner or later, you will encounter
failure. It would be wise, at that time, to figure out just what went wrong.
A failure in the offing represents one of the only times that minority
shareholders or minority investors become a potential boon. If you can
offload your share of a failing company on them and shimmy out the door,
then you should certainly do so. They may be prepared to take over and
attempt themselves to make a success from your failure.
Most people close very few companies or projects in their lift and they are
often unaware of closure costs. They nearly always underestimate them. The
magazine business will provide a classic example which may surprise you.
Believe it or not, there are magazines that have been propped up on life-support by large publishing companies for years. The executives will be fully
aware that their magazine is not viable and will never be viable. Let us say  
it
is losing $3 million a year. Why not close it without further ado?
The answer is closing costs. The hidden cost of failure.
In our example, the cost of shutting down the magazine will far exceed
the three million it costs to keep the wretched rag just breathing. Why so?
Because magazines sell large numbers of subscriptions to readers. In
America, these 'subs' are often sold at a knockdown price to encourage the
appearance to advertisers and others of growth. It is a foolish practice, but it
is ubiquitous.
Even if the magazine's 'subs' price is a reasonable one, there have been
numerous cases of a form of petty 'bribery' where potential subscribers are
wooed by publishers to subscribe with the offer of a free clock-radio or
reduced memberships to health clubs, etc. These cheap prices and free gifts'
create a massive liability in the publisher's balance sheet - which is fine as
long as advertising continues to pour in. But when the magazine is no  
longer
flavour-of-the-month and advertising is falling off, the misery begins.
Let us say a dying magazine has a million subscribers. Most of them are
not 'real' subscribers, but, even so, they have paid their dollar per copy and
are owed, on average, six more issues. This means the cost of reimbursing
the subscribers alone will exceed $6 million in refunds. (It will exceed it, by
the way, because of the huge cost of collating and mailing the refunds to a
million people.)
Of course, the publisher will also face other closure costs, including
redundancy payments to magazine staff, rebates to advertisers and possibly
to printers and paper merchants and a host of other creepy-crawlies that
will come slithering out of the woodwork when news that the ship is sink-
ing spreads abroad. In all, sudden-death closure costs might be as high as
$8 million.
The publishers only hope is to cut costs to the bone, cease soliciting any
discounted subscriptions, fulfil the subscriptions with very thin, very cheap
editions of the magazine - now a shadow of its former self in quality and
number of pages - and thereby reduce what, in the jargon, we call the 'subs
liability'. This can only be done if the poor beast is stilt technically alive.
In the meantime, the publishers hope that many staff will not wait to befired but will seek other jobs and reduce closure costs by reducing redun-
dancy payments. It took one of the largest magazine-publishing corporations
in America over five years to bring about the closure of what was then still
one of the best-known magazines in the world. It lost money for every one
of those five years. Let's take a look at why.
Over five years, in our hypothetical example, losses would total $15
million - surely more than the cost of instantly shooting the brute? Yes, but
that $15 million will have been spread out over those five years. The parent
company can afford to carry such a burden. Profits will only be slightly
affected each year and senior executives will still receive their precious  
annual
bonuses. Even better, the share price will suffer mildly, if at all. On the other
hand, if the full $8 million (or more) for sudden-death was charged in a
single year, not only would the senior management's bonuses evaporate
(horror of horrors!), the share price would probably take a hit from negative
publicity and profit-and-loss considerations.
But how can it be good for a company to waste the difference between
$8 million and $15 million for an asset going nowhere? The medium- or
long-term answer is that it isn't good. The company will have squandered $7
million (more, with inflation taken into consideration) and clogged up its
managerial focus with a deadbeat property. But the short-term answer is that
it's probably the best thing to do in the circumstances. Not to mention that
in larger corporations, the short term is often the only term senior manage-
ment, goaded on by share price 'analysts', can bring itself to care about.
I mention all this just to give you a sense of what failure tastes like and a
glimpse at the hidden costs of closure. If there is any way at all you can play
'pass the parcel' with a venture you believe is destined to fail and in which
you are a principal, then do not hesitate. Pass the damn parcel and move on
to the next opportunity.
But how can you know when things are going to fail? You cannot.
Nobody has 20/20 future vision. But if you are running the business, you
will certainly know much earlier than anyone else. Providing you are willing
to stare reality in the face, that is, which many executives and entrepreneurs
are not.
I'm now going to give you a piece of obvious advice. Listen closely to
your bean-counters and accountants. Or seek one out you trust when the
whiff of failure is in the air and get advice. They are a much-maligned  
group,bean-counters. It is true that they are risk averse to an extraordinary degree,
and that if bean-counters ruled the world we would be permitted to produce
nothing but beans, just to be on the safe side. But they also have professional
training. And many of them have seen financial failure before and know that
the light at the end of the tunnel is probably an oncoming train. If you listen
very carefully and are careful, too, to mask your irritation at their litany of
hard facts, you might save yourself a small fortune.
There are incompetent and even crooked bean-counters, of course, and
I have, sadly, employed one or two of them. But on the whole, I wish I had
listened more often and more carefully to their advice in my business life.
When the going is getting rough, when there is a scent of rotting fish in the
air, they are right more often than they are wrong. Curse them.
All very well, but how can you know when things are soon to collapse
about your ears and what can you do if, having followed my instructions to
the letter, you are the sole owner of your little company? Not a lot, but we'll
take a shot at it.
Books on management theory at this point normally advise you not to
panic. I don't agree with that. It's my belief that adrenaline and a touch of
panic are tremendous motivators. Of course, you can't stay in a panic, but
a dose of panic in a private place, with a bottle of malt whisky on one hand
and a bean-counter on the other, can be a very motivational experience.
Motivational and salutary.
But never despair. We are not engaged upon a serious business here. We
are only talking about the getting of money, and, occasionally, the losing of
money. You may despair when you have broken your neck; you may  
despair
when your only child has predeceased you; you may despair when terrible
wars, famines or plagues afflict millions of innocents. But you must not
despair over a simple thing like money. Take a shot of comfort from poetry
- here are three stanzas from Arthur Hugh Clough's poem, 'Say Not the
Struggle Nought Availeth':
Say not the struggle nought availetb,
The labour and the wounds are vain,
The enemy faints not, not faileth,
And as things have been they remain.
If hopes were dupes, fears may be liars;
It may be, in yon smoke concealed.Tour comrades chase e'en now the fliers,
And, but for you, possess the field.
And not by eastern windows only,
When daylight comes, comes in the light.
In front the sun climbs slow, how slowly,
But westward, look, the land is bright.
It may not be great poetry, but at least it's cheerful in a melancholy sort of
way. And his point about the smoke of battle obscuring the landscape is well
made. So what are we to do? Or, rather, what are you to do?
Firstly, you must see how much time is left. In the days of the dot com
boom they used to call this your 'burn rate'. (At what rate were the dot com
bandits and entrepreneurs burning through the money provided to them by
misguided saps who trusted and believed in them? When would they go bust
or need more money?)
Once you have established just how long you can continue to trade with-
out falling into the technical trap of illegal trading (which you must not do,
my friend), you should make an inventory. And I do not mean an inventory
of your office furniture, computer systems (you will have spent far too much
on those items, I will wager) or your piles of unused stationery.
You need to analyse the beast you had hoped would make you money.
Just like those brilliant software designers, who invent software that 
solves no
known problem and must then search for or invent a problem for their  
soft-
ware to solve, so you must consider whether your beast would make  
money
in another man's kennel.
Might it have uses that you have not yet considered? Might it be a
money-maker if it was viewed in another light? This is more often the 
case
than you might suppose.
Take the story of Ray Kroc, founder of the McDonald's fast-food chain.
He bought McDonald's, an uninspiring, no-hum burger business,  
because
he realised, in a flash of astonishing intuition, that what Americans on  
the
road needed was not fine cuisine or the best burger money could buy. What
Americans wanted, as they travelled vast distances across interstate 
highways,
was consistency, cleanliness and fast service.
They didn't care if the burger was a mediocre burger. All they cared
about was being certain they would be served the same burger they
consumed in the last McDonald's they visited, perhaps hundreds of  
miles
away. Swift service, a clean environment and consistency. That was the 
secret
of one of the most astonishing business success stories in American 
history.
Kroc was viewing an existing product in a different light.
Kroc did not invent the hamburger. He saw that hamburger outlets
could become a different beast from other fast-food outlets at the time.
McDonald's is only called McDonald's today by an accident. It would  
not
really have mattered which burger business Kroc had decided to  
purchase.
His genius lay not in producing a burger, but in allaying Americans'  
fears
that the next place they stopped at for fast food might poison them, or
charge exorbitant prices, or make them wait an instant longer than was
necessary. (This tale is simplified. The business of creating franchises 
also had
a great deal to do with Kroc's success. But the analogy holds true.)
So look at your own, ailing beast. Can it be something else? Can you
make it a tiger of a different stripe, or can somebody else? Is it really  
not a
valid business? Would more capital help, or would that be throwing  
good
money after bad? Your analysis must be ruthless. If there is anyone with 
busi-
ness savvy in the world you trust, now is the time to seek them out, tell 
your
story and listen.
Should you determine  that the  beast is worthless,  both to you or
anybody else, still do not give up. At least try to sell it, I once forgot to  
doso and lost a lot of money that already had my name on it. Money that 
was
piled neatly in a bank waiting for me to collect it. Let me explain.
We once launched a magazine in Britain called Stuff. It was a big launch,
too. The idea behind Stuff was that it would be like many other young 
men's
magazines (zany humour, great photography of beautiful girls in 
swimsuits,
articles stuffed with attitude), but it would also specialise in gadgets and 
new
technology. The magazine would be a shop window for the kind of guy 
who
always seems to have a new gadget before you've heard of it.
Stuff was launched with great fanfare in the UK and promptly failed. It
took us a while to cotton on (too long, to be honest) but the writing was  
on
the wall.
Stuff had cost me a fortune to launch and I was angry about it. We
should have done better and we all knew it. I demanded it be closed at a
tension-packed board meeting. We began preparing the closure press 
release
and readying ourselves to tell the staff of Stuff the bad news. Word of 
our
decision leaked out around the British magazine industry. (Why is it that 
bad
news travels faster than the speed of light?)
What happened next is the subject of dispute. I believe that I was already
slated to have lunch with one of Britain's most amusing and canny 
magazine
publishers, Michael Heseltine — that's the Lord Heseltine to you,  
chum.
Michael had helped to found Haymarket Publishing many years before, 
after
a career as a property developer. He then went into politics and very 
nearly
reached the top of the greasy pole. Personally, I think Britain would be  
a
better place today if he had reached it, but that's by the by.
Michael and I always lunch in a seafood restaurant called Wilton's. We've
been doing so for years. Michael had heard that I was closing Stuff. And 
he
had seen what I had not. That Stuff could be a tiger of a different stripe  
if it
was published solely as a gadget magazine around the world. It didn't  
need
too much zany humour or girls in swimsuits. They could be dispensed 
with.
He made me an offer. I was caught unawares, having gone to Wilton's
to drown my sorrows. I was also massively embarrassed, not because  
we
were going to close a magazine - we all have to do that from time to  
time
in the publishing game - but because we had FORGOTTEN TO TRY  
TO
SELL IT.
It was humiliating, I could have kicked myself. I tried damage limitation
in our 'negotiations', but Michael has negotiated with  the likes of the rulers
of China and the USSR and he knew I was bluffing. I had no other poten-
tial buyer. I could not create an auction. Dennis Publishing had all bar
announced Stuffs, closure. I was trapped and had nowhere to go.
To cut to the chase, Michael was very decent about it and paid me a fair
sum for the brute. I cannot tell you how much, but I suspect it is more than
most individuals have earned in the last decade. Even so, it was not exactly a
fortune. I did manage to negotiate one concession, one 'rogue element'.
Haymarket would buy the right to publish Stuff anywhere in the world
except for North, Central and South America.
I duly launched Stuff later in the USA, where it has been a success and
sells more than its rival, FHM. Haymarket, on the other hand, has launched
Stuff in many countries around the world. I do not want to know how many
countries, because I will only get cross again if someone remembers to tell
me. I had broken two of my own cardinal rules and paid the price. I had not
looked to see if the leopard could change its spots, and I had not instructed
my managers at Dennis Publishing to quietly sound out the chances of sell-
ing Stuff.
So just before you dump your dream into the gutter, ensure you do the
rounds of other companies in your neck of the woods. It only takes two of
them to become interested and you have the chance of getting an auctiongoing. That has to be better than throwing your toys out of the cot in a
paddy, as I did with Stuff. But only a bit better. Failure is always a bitch.
FACING THE MUSIC
Behold, I have played the fool,
and erred exceedingly.
THE BIBLE, I SAMUEL 26:21
So here you are up to your neck in trouble. You have figured out your busi-
ness isn't viable. You've tried to look at the beast another way. No joy there.
You've made some humiliating telephone calls and paid some visits and tried
to sell it or even give it away.
No interest. What now?
Of course, you can try cutting costs to the bone. But that is of little use
if there are insufficient costs to cut. And firing people is never much fun.
Downsizing
The firm's alive with murmurs,
The thrum of gossips din,
The shrugs of old long-termers -
Whoever's out - they're in.
No parachutes or rip-cords,
No lifebuoys as she dives,
Fat bastards with their clipboards
Are sharpening their knives.
Receptionists are tearful,
The Boss averts his eye,
'H.R.' is grimly cheerful -
But then - they're paid to lie.
It's meeting, every minute,
It's tackle, grapple, block!
It's 'keep yer head down', innit?It's in by eight o'clock!
It's straining blood and sinew
To keep abreast of moves:
The hangings will continue
- Until morale improves!'
And if 'downswing' and cutting costs won't do the trick, what then? You'll
have to close the business. Be careful not to continue ordering goods or serv-
ices you know you will not be able to pay for. That's not just ethically wrong,
it's legally wrong and you can get into serious trouble if you do it.
If necessary, you might have to declare bankruptcy. Well, you won't be
the first dreamer to do it, nor the first who came back from the experience
for a second bite at the cherry. Besides, bankruptcy laws and rules have
changed beyond recognition in recent years and have made the process far
less onerous than it used to be. The authorities appear to bend over back-
wards to help people declare bankruptcy today.
I've never had to declare bankruptcy, thank goodness, but I sailed fairly
close to the wind a few times in the early days. I expect most entrepreneurs
do. It has always amazed me how kind many suppliers are if you speak to
them on the level. It's the King and ducking and diving, the wasting of their
time calling you and never having their calls returned that really gets their
goat. (They probably knew you were going to go belly up before you did.)
Don't play it like that. Play it straight. Be honest with them and show
them you're doing your best. You can't do any more than that.
Especially don't forget to let the VAT and Inland Revenue boys know
what's going on. The earlier you take them into your confidence, the more
leniently you will be treated. Sure they can seem like ogres, but I've never
found them to be so. They're human beings, just like you. Treat them like
human beings, show them you are doing your best, and you may be very
pleasantly surprised.
But don't try to cheat them, my friend. Don't even think about screwing
the VAT man or the Inland Revenue. Your arm's too short to box with God.
And do your damnedest to see that the little people get paid, if you can.
Your large suppliers will have built a bad-debt percentage into their budget
for the year. You will become just another irritating percentage point in theirannual accounts. But the lad you hired to answer the telephone doesn't have
a bad-debt percentage built in, or an accountant to keep it all straight. He
expects to be paid. And he should be paid, even if you have to sell that nice
office furniture you foolishly ordered.
The more honest you are about your misfortune with those affected by it,
the easier the comeback will be. There is going to be a comeback, isn't there?
But the more you weasel and fib or tell outright lies or blame somebody else,
the less likely it is that anyone will want to do business with you again.
Some people seem to think that out of sight is out of mind. That if they
cheat you and a few months or years go by, you will forgive them, or, better
still, forget about them. But we don't forget and forgive people who weasel.
I can remember the name of a man who stitched me up for only a thou-
sand pounds twenty-five years ago. I've spent more than that on a fancy busi-
ness lunch since, and yet if his name comes up I will still cheerfully traduce
him to anyone who will listen. If he'd said sorry and been honest with me, I
doubt I would remember the incident had occurred.
Screwing up isn't criminal or deliberate or malevolent. But covering up is,
if you get caught. And you will get caught- ask the shade of Richard Nixon.
Closing down a business or going into bankruptcy is a miserable business
at any time. My advice is not to make it worse by omitting to apologise and
shoulder the responsibility squarely. But don't take it too much to heart.
There's always the chance of a comeback.
That sounds easy for me to say. But I came very, very close to having to
declare bankruptcy back in the Kung-fu Monthly days due to over-trading,
and I went through many of the procedures I've just discussed. It's a rotten
job, so get it done as fairly and as responsibly as you can. Experience is  
only
a name we give to our failures.
You are now a more experienced person. And next time round you'll
ensure that you do not duplicate your earlier mistakes. As old lags tell new
inmates in the nick: 'You'vc done the crime, now do the time. No whinge-
ing." It's good advice.
KEEPING IT STRAIGHT
Once in the racket, you're always in it.
AL CAPONE, PHILADELPHIA PUBLIC LEDGER
Lastly in this section on business catastrophes, I'd like to talk a little aboutcompany money, personal money, and keeping on the straight and narrow.
About dealing with temptation and avoiding a particular type of catastro-
phe for which there is not the remedy of a bankruptcy petition or a sincere
apology.
When you start a business, you are taking a risk. Sometimes a huge
risk, relatively speaking. This can have the effect, if you're lucky enough to
have any success, of muddling in your mind just what money belongs to
which party.
It seems simple. It's your company, and therefore your money. But it isn't,
you know. That's not how the law sees it and not how your creditors see it  
and
not how the tax authorities see it. It took me a while to get all this straight-
ened out in my own mind and to learn from one or two unhappy experiences.
If you're game, I hope to be able to save you from the errors I made and
that I've seen others make on the subject of what money belongs in which
pot. It goes something like this.
A limited liability company is a legal entity. In theory, it is immortal. It
has rights and duties just as you do. It cannot be used as a personal milk cow
for you to plunder at will. You can certainly milk it, but only within reason,
only when there is enough milk to do so, and only in certain ways. If you
deviate from permitted methods, you can get yourself in a whole heap of
trouble very quickly.
I have a friend, who must remain nameless. You'll see why in a minute.
He is a lovely bloke with a fantastic wife and two great kids. He started with
a little more capital than I did (that wouldn't have been hard) at about the
same time I set out. His business is international in scope and must be worth
tens of millions of pounds by now. The compilers of the Sunday Times Rich
List certainly think so, and have placed him in the lower readies of their list
for years.
But he has a blind spot. He believes he is his company. He thinks he and
his company are the same thing. Nothing will persuade him he is not. That's
a huge, potentially catastrophic, misunderstanding.
He has a home in Spain, and what a home! He has equipped it with
phones, fax and computers and stays there a couple of months every year,
with his family. The company owns the house. He used his company's  
money
to buy it. He claims he works from that house - and maybe he does, a little.
But there aren't many people like me. I can sit (I am sitting) in one ofthe loveliest houses on earth and work. I work eight to ten hours every day
locked away in a purpose-built work area. And I can prove I work. I make
sure I can prove it, I am not pretending my house is a place where I work for
several months every year. It is a place where I work and all the records of
telephone calls, computer usage, fax communications and the resulting
paperwork proves it. More importantly, I bought my house with my own
money, not the company's money.
That's not my friend's way. Not with a beautiful wife and children at an
age when you want to spend time snorkelling and playing soccer with them
on a Spanish beach. He doesn't really work in his Spanish house. He
pretends to. For years, I have warned him he is running a huge risk. His
company is paying for a 'benefit in kind' and that's just not on. He is break-
ing the rules and breaking the Saw by having the company pay for everything
and not declaring a 'benefit in kind'.
And what's so bad about that? Rather a lot, I'm afraid.
If (and I pray it is not when) the Inland Revenue catch him, he will be
for the high jump. If you use your company's money to buy yourself a fancy
car or a house or a boat or anything at all of that nature without declaring
it, you are a criminal. Full stop. And sometimes, the Inland Revenue and
the VAT collectors put such criminals in jail. As well as fining them huge
sums of money. So why does my friend do it? Because he founded the
company. In his mind, he took all the risk and he thinks that whatever
money the company has no use for belongs to him. But it doesn't. Not
unless it is paid as salary, or a bonus or as a dividend. This is the thing to
keep in the forefront of your mind.
It's the company's money. Believe it or not, despite the fact that my friend
is the sole shareholder in the company, he is not only stealing from the
Inland Revenue by his actions, he is stealing from his own company. It 
sounds
bizarre. But it's true.
Now I hate taxes as much as the next man. We are ridiculously over-taxed
in Britain and the clever-dick 'stealth' taxes that our current government
loves to worm into the fine print of every budget are a moral disgrace, as well
as counter-productive in raising total revenues. So are our inheritance taxes,
our so-called death duties. So are capital gains taxes, in my opinion. But my
opinion doesn't count. I do not have judges and police officers and Inland
Revenue investigators and jails at my disposal. The government does. It's
crazy to take on an opponent with so much firepower and try to cheat it of
what the law says is its due.There are a thousand other ways sole owners can cheat the Revenue and
bilk their company. There's no need for me to list them here - I'm sure you
can imagine them easily enough. But listen to me. Don't go there. Just don't
go there.
Pay your taxes, remembering that no less a person than a lord chiefjustice of England once said that an English citizen has not only the right but
a duty to pay only the minimum tax applicable to him. You see, even high
court judges aren't too keen on the Inland Revenue! Pay the least tax that is
lawful. But pay it.
Because I own numerous companies, I have even set up a private office
to ensure that one company isn't paying for me to make calls on behalf of
another. It's a good system and has worked well over the years.
It needed to be. When you are one of the richest people in the country,
the Inland Revenue allots you a special 'watcher'. This experienced civil
servant keeps his or her beady eyes on you and your private and corporate tax
affairs. I know he's watching me - and he knows that I know he's watching.
Recently, I was investigated by the tax authorities. It was a long investi-
gation and cost the Revenue a good deal of money, I should think. I had
never been investigated before. The arguments were complex and related to
what tax was owed at what time, as opposed to whether tax was owed or not,
or how much it all came to.
I was able to settle for a fair sum. (You always seem to have to settle in a
tax investigation, or so I'm told. The taxman rarely lets you off scot-free.)
My advisors and accountants demonstrated that I had never knowingly
robbed the Revenue of a penny.
It cost me a lot of money to prove it; some of which will be defrayed
against my next tax bill. But I wasn't concerned during the investigation,
because I knew I hadn't diddled anybody. That's another reason to keep on
the straight and narrow. You don't waste a lot of time covering up and
wondering if you will be found out.
The directors of my companies, too, know that I do not 'raid' those
companies improperly for cash, or force them to buy me my Rolls-Royce
Phantoms, Maybachs and Bentleys. Nor do I get the companies to send me
abroad for vacations or ask them to purchase houses for me to live in.
This is not because I am a better man, or ethically and morally superior
to my friend. It's because I have been in prison once, for a short while, and
I have no intention of going back there again. (I wasn't sent to prison for
anything to do with money - it was over a hippy magazine the government
took exception to decades ago.)
My friend, however, has never been to prison. Let's hope he never does.
But I don't fancy his chances much while he keeps up his idiotic belief thathe is his company and he can do what he likes with his company's money and
cheat the taxman while he's at it.
On a separate and happier subject, if you wind up investing and doing
business in the USA, do make certain you become a part of 'the non-double -
taxation treaty'. This ensures you are not taxed on profits you made in the
States and then taxed on them all over again when you bring the money back
to Britain. Or vice versa.
As for becoming a tax exile (leaving a country to avoid paying tax by exploit-
ing loopholes in the law), I tried it once, twenty-odd years ago. It may work for
some people, but I found it tiresome, oddly disturbing and counter-productive.
(Mind you, the capital gains tax in those days was astronomical- something like
80 or 90 percent, so it was understandable why so many of us were on the same
Concorde flight on 3 April 1983! You see? The date is engraved on my soul.
Exile of any sort is never pleasant and rarely worth the bother.)
How to sum all this up? I'm not an accountant, but it goes like this, I
think. If your company can afford to pay you money, then that's fine, as long
as you declare that it has been paid and get ready to pay the tax on that
payment. If you find other ways of moving the company's money into your
own pocket without reporting the movement or using a company asset for
your personal life, you're almost certainly milking the cow in a way that is
not permitted.
It's that simple. And my advice is to keep it simple, and to hire compe-
tent tax advisors just as soon as you begin earning money over and above
your salary.
After all, what's the point of getting rich and then sitting for a year or
more behind bars in a nasty, dangerous environment while the authorities
figure out just how much they are going to fine you and how long you are
going to rot there? Prisons may have improved since the days of Newgate,
but I can assure you they are not pleasant places to be.
There are a thousand professionals who will show you how to pay the
minimum of tax possible in return for a fee. I reckon that an investment in
those services, extortionate as they may seem, is a far better investment than
fiddling what you should have paid the taxman in the first place.
Getting rich isn't so difficult. But if you want to stay rich, then pay your
taxes and don't milk the cow without reporting it. End of lecture.1 7
A RECAP
FOR IDLERS
Here we all are in no-man's land,
The lame and the halt, the sick and the damned;
Tunnelling dirt and shovelling sand,
Here we all are in no-man's land...
'No-MAN's LAND'
Most of us love short cuts, though they often lead us astray. Or magic bullets
which we are told will solve an intractable problem, though we know they
don't really exist. Not in the real world.
This desire to 'cut to the chase' is perfectly understandable. Our lives are
short, and none of us is getting any younger. But if you've just picked up this
book and have turned straight to this chapter, then I'm afraid you're proba-
bly in for a disappointment. 'A Recap for Idlers' is not a short cut or a magic
bullet to save you reading the rest of the book. Instead, I am going to
attempt to recap the 'important bits', or rather, the bits that I now believe
were important when I was getting rich myself.
So please be warned: parts of what follow won't make much sense if you
are unfamiliar with what came before.
THE QUEST  FOR WEALTH: A HEALTH WARNING
There is no fortress so strong that money cannot take it.
CICERO, IN VERREM
Cicero was a subtle man. Money can reduce any fortress; but which fortress
is he speaking of, do you think? The enemy's (whoever the 'enemy' may be)
or your own? Let us assume it is the latter.
So what is your fortress? It is your inner core, your integrity, your belief
in the worth of others and the love of those dear to you. Not to mention
your own worth. It arises from belief in yourself. And, for a few, from a  
belief
in their own destiny.Excessive idolatry of money will 'take' all those. It will corrode both self-
belief and love. It will stretch integrity on the rack. It will 'take' the fortress;
and it will not be a pretty sight.
Seeking substantial wealth is almost always a fool's game. The statistics
show that very few people ever succeed. Most of them should never have
made the attempt in the first place. They aren't suited to it. And if that
sounds defeatist, then consider the fact that the search will take up a great
deal of your waking life for many, many years.
You cannot get rich without 'wasting' that time. Not unless you were
born lucky - so lucky that luck would have squatted on your shoulder virtu-
ally from birth. You would not need to get rich, then. You would already be
rich, in one way or another.
Time is finite. Which is a fancy way of saying that you only have so much
of it - then it will run out. When you are young, time seems to stretch into
the distance for so far that surely it will always be on your side? When the
young catch the old unawares, they may sometimes glimpse a look of naked
envy, which is then instantly disguised.
And the old have reason to be envious. Truly, truly, they do.
Ask me what I will give you if you could wave a magic wand and give me
my youth back. The answer would be everything I own and everything I will
ever own. In The Odyssey we read:
And Achilles replied, 'Do not speak soothingly to me of death, glorious
Odysseus. I would rather live on earth as a bondsman to the meanest
peasant, than be king of all the shadows.'
Homer, as always, is right.
If you are young and reading this then I ask you to remember just this:
you are richer than anyone older than you, and far richer than those who are
much older. What you choose to do with the time that stretches out before
you is entirely a matter for you. But do not say you started the journey poor.
If you are young, you are infinitely richer than I can ever be again.
Money is never owned. It is only in your custody for a while. Time is
always running on, and the young have more of it in their pocket than the
richest man or woman alive. That is not sentimentality speaking. That is
sober fact.And yet you wish to waste your youth in the getting of money? Really?
Think hard, my young cub, think hard and think long before you embark on
such a quest. The time spent attempting to acquire wealth will mount up.
And it cannot be reclaimed, whether you succeed or whether you fail.
And even should you succeed in becoming rich, unlikely as that is, what
will you have achieved: Independence of a kind? The luxury to choose what
you wish to do with the rest of your life? Happiness? No, no and no. You will
not achieve any of those things. Not when you have too much money.
As Francis Bacon, one of the greatest minds ever to grace England's
corridors of power, warned in his Essays:
I cannot call Riches better than the baggage (hindrance) of virtue. The
Roman word is better, impedimenta. For as the baggage is to an army,
so riches to virtue. It cannot be spared or left behind, but it hindereth the
march; yea, and the care of it sometime loseth or disturbeth the victory.
It does indeed. Wealth makes many demands and, by the time you have
acquired it, you will be prey to certain habits. You will fear to lose it and must
spend a great deal more time to defend it. No one is 'independent' of the
human race. 'No man is an island entire of itself, every man is a piece of the
continent, a part of the main.'' Heed the words of John Donne, finest of
poets: 'And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls: it tolls for
thee.' Aye, so it does.
No luxury of choices for rich little you. You will be too busy keeping the
sea from washing away the sand you have spent so long collecting at such
terrible cost to your health and your sanity and your relationships with
others. It is always thus. There is no escape. You believe (I know you do) that
it will be different for you. But it won't be. It never is.
Happiness? Do not make me laugh. The rich are not happy. I have yet to
meet a single really rich happy man or woman - and I have met many rich
people. The demands from others to share their wealth become so tiresome,
and so insistent, they nearly always decide they must insulate themselves.
Insulation breeds paranoia and arrogance. And loneliness. And rage that you
have only so many years left to enjoy rolling in the sand you have piled up.
The only people the self-made rich can trust are those who knew them
before they became wealthy. For many newly rich people, the world becomes
a smaller, less generous and darker place. It sounds ridiculous, doesn't it?
Ridiculous and gloomy.
But then, you are to consider that I have been very poor and I am now-very rich. I am an optimist by nature. And I have the ability to write poetry
and create the forest I am busy planting. Am I happy? No. Or, at least, only
occasionally, when I am walking in the woods alone, or deeply ensconced in
composing a difficult piece of verse, or sitting quietly with old friends over a
bottle of wine. Or feeding a stray cat.
I could do all those things without wealth. So why do I not give it all away?
Because I worked too hard for it. Because I am tainted by it. Because I
am afraid to. All those reasons and more. Perhaps, if l am lucky enough to
become old, I will accumulate something else: the courage to give it all away
before I die. That would be a good thing, I think.
(When I die, it is all going to a charity called 'The Forest of Dennis'. You
see, even when I do a good thing with my money, my ego insists that I name
it for myself. Not a good sign.)
Giving money away when you are dead takes no guts. No courage. But
to divest yourself of hundreds of millions of dollars, or the greater part of
your fortune, before your death? That would be something to be proud of,
don't you think? It even makes logical sense.
For what is left afterwards but a few tears by a graveside and years of bick-
ering and waste over a complex will? (The wills of the rich are always
complex.) Bitter years, where lawyers count the number of fairies they  
believe
you once thought danced upon the head of a pin - years in which they enrich
themselves at your descendants' expense. A fine legacy, to be sure.
But you must make your own choice. I have said my piece and I meant
every word of it. This small part of my book was composed in my mind years
ago. It was easy to write. I knew all of it before my fingers touched the
keyboard. It has troubled me for years and I thank you for allowing me to
share it.
I suspect it will have little effect on you, though. You are probably young
and are tired of being poor. And tired, from years of growing up and school-
ing, and of being lectured. Very well. Let us return to a recap of the 'impor-
tant bits' to help you on your journey. But just before we do, can I ask you
to do me a small favour?
Please lodge one fact in your memory: that the last one thousand five
hundred words WAS an 'important bit'. In my heart of hearts, I know it was
the most important bit you will read in this book.
Mark it with a bookmark and write today's day upon it. Come back to itin twenty or thirty years, when new books printed on paper will be rare
objects. Then cast your mind back to a time when you were young, and you
first read this book, and to the thoughts of a fool, a rich poet, long dead,
who once typed these words sitting in one of the most beautiful houses on
earth, staring at a turquoise sea, sipping a glass of slightly chilled Chateau
d'Yquem.
That will be enough for me.
Enough! Let's get on with getting rich!
CUT LOOSE
When all the world is young, lad,
And all the trees are green;
And every goose a swan, lad,
And every lass a queen;
Then hey for boot and horse, lad,
And round the world away;
Young blood must have its course, lad,
And every dog his day.
CHARLES KlNGSLEY, FROM THE WATER BABIES
You have to cut loose to get rich. There isn't any other way.
Firstly, of course, you must break loose from your parents and family
home. It's possible to get rich from your bedroom while your mother is iron-
ing your shirt or blouse downstairs, I suppose. But it's unlikely.
I read in my magazine The Week (shameless plug) that hundreds of thou-
sands of young men in Japan are isolating themselves in their bedrooms for
months or even years at a time in a growing phenomenon known as hikiko-
mori, or 'withdrawal'.
How ineffably sad. Modern society is breeding a race of New Age young
hermits. The article goes on to report that many parents can support such
children indefinitely, and they choose to do so. 'Japanese parents tell their
children to fly,' one expert told The New York Times, 'while holding firmly
to their ankles.'Let's assume you have no wish to spend the next few years locked in your
bedroom. What then? Perhaps you are already working. Perhaps you are
living with someone, or are married, or have children. No matter. As long as
you have cut the parental knot, you are in good shape.
Now you must cut yourself loose from naysayers and negative influences:
the Jeremiahs. These wretches cover the face of the earth. They will tell  
you,
if you listen, about the impossibility (not the foolishness) of trying to make
yourself wealthy. In doing so, they drain confidence and optimism from you.
Such people often include your parents, your lover, your husband or your
wife, and your 'friends'. Which is not surprising. It's not that they do not
care about you. They may well do so, in their own way. But two cardinal  
fears
rule their concern.
Firstly, they fear that you are placing yourself in harm's way — and, to
them, that cannot be a good thing. Secondly, they fear that if you should
succeed, you will expose their own timidity to the light of day.
The order in the 'pack' from which you spring, the family grouping, will
be shattered. Should you become rich you will become the number-one dog
in the pack, and their own order will slip accordingly. Above all, they do not
wish to be faced with the mess and chaos that accompanies strenuous effort.
They want the familiarity and sense of false security that comes with things
staying as they are.
Do not despise these people. Seek to calm them. Or hide from them
what you are about for as long as you can. If that will not work, ignore them
and move on. That is a hard thing to say and a harder thing to do, but it is
necessary. You cannot spend your life assuaging the fear of failure (and
success) that is the common lot of the risk averse.
Should you have parents who are too ambitious for your future, then much
the same advice applies. The stereotype for this in the twentieth century was
the American Jewish mother, determined that her sons should become  
doctors
or lawyers. This is all very well, but it will not make you rich, because, in its
way, it is yet another attempt to slot you into a preordained path. You must  
cut
loose from it to become wealthy. Or to be happy, for that matter.
Fear of failure is a subject about which I have already written in this
book, probably to excess. I repeat that it is the main stumbling block togetting rich for most people. You simply have to face up to it, stare it in the
eye and cut loose from such thoughts. Here is Robert Johnson, perhaps the
greatest blues guitarist who ever lived, singing about fear of failure:
I got stones in my passway and my road seems dark at night.
I got stones in my passway and my road seems dark at night,
I have pains in my heart, they have taken my appetite.
No doubt. Johnson died of poison, administered by the lover or husband of
a girl he was making eyes at in a juke joint. The story goes that he was
warned that his drink had been poisoned. He smiled and drank it anyway. It
took him a day or so to die, in agony one assumes.
I have often wondered why he did it. Perhaps it was because he already
knew how great a musician he was. (When I say Johnson was the greatest
blues guitarist who ever lived, I mean precisely that. He is worshipped by
musicians such as Eric Clapton and Ry Cooder.) Such knowledge breeds the
kind of recklessness you see when people walk right to the edge of a cliff and
perform a handstand, just for the hell of it.
I used to do such things myself. I would run across a narrow waterpipe
that spanned a canal and weir. If I had fallen, I would probably have
drowned. The canal was near a pub where I used to play with an R&B band.
Some nights, I would earn more money from bystanders by running back-
wards and forwards across that pipe than from my performance fee. It was
stupid and dangerous. But somehow, I knew I wouldn't fall.
I'm not suggesting you begin doing handstands on clifftops or risking
life and limb. But I am suggesting that you must cut loose, in your mind,
from your previous life. Getting rich comes from an attitude of mind. It isn't
going to happen if things drift on pretty much the way they are right now.
Cutting loose can be painful. I have heard of very few men or women
who made a ton of money who did not leave, or divorce, their wives or
husbands or lovers sooner or later. Or who were not estranged from family
members, often their children. It comes with the territory. Even if you hand
over large sums as a gift to those you had to cut loose from to get it, they
will never really forgive you.
It isn't the money, you see. It is because you have humiliated them, in
their minds anyway, both by succeeding and by valuing the time it took for
you to succeed over their part in your life. And that, in a nutshell, is why it
is so important to cut loose, especially in the early days.Focus, determination and relentless drive are wearing in themselves -
both to you and those around you. Any distraction whatever can cost you a
chance that may not come again. And, for the purposes of this book, family,
lovers and friends are distractions, plain and simple.
There are exceptions, of course, and perhaps you will be one of them.
But don't count on it. Chances are that you will have to cut loose from your
old life in more ways than you imagine and that the breach will never really
be healed.
Lasdy, it goes without saying that you must cut loose from working for
other people. If you have been gainfully employed since you left school or
college, this is an oddly difficult thing to do.
It is dunned into our head that we should work. Western civilisation is
based upon a work ethic that has propelled it into the front rank of
the tribes and cultures we share this planet with. If you have ever stood,
early in the morning, on a weekday in New York City and watched the
countless tens of thousands of workers hurrying to their steel and glass
towers, you can catch a scent of this ethic. It is frightening, but exhilarating,
too. The air itself reeks of drive, and determination and focus. It is like a
drug. And it has served America and her people well - at least in the sense
of material wealth.
Now you must leave the safety of the ant colony and the hive. You are to
become a loner, an outcast, cut off from the very thing that defines what
many of us believe we are. What is the first question usually asked by
strangers of each other? Right, it's 'What do you do?' In some cultures, the
way of answering may be different; but it nearly always relates to work in the
West: 'I'm a teacher; I'm in banking; I'm a dairy farmer; I'm an HR admin-
istrator; I'm a sound engineer.' Our job defines us.
But it cannot define you. Not any more. You are a wild pig rooting for
truffles. You are a weasel about to rip the throat out of a rabbit. You are an
entrepreneur. You are going to be rich, and you don't much care, within the
law, how you are going to do it.
I recently attended a funeral. These days, I attend too many of them. The
elderly mother of one of my girlfriends at school was there. Truth to tell, I
had forgotten of her existence. I only dated her daughter once or twice.
The old lady looked me up and down in a disquieting way and I had a
vision of a much younger woman cutting me a slice of cake and pouring me
a cup of tea.'So you did it,' she said, her thin lips half smiling, but compressed in a
disapproving line.
'Uh-huh,' I replied, not knowing what the hell she was talking about.
'I hope it was worth it?'
'What was worth what, ma'am?7
'You used to frighten me, did you know that? Oh, I was frightened you
would marry Sally. But I was frightened of you. I was a mother and thirty
years older than you. But you scared the hell out of me. I told Sally to stay
away from you.'
'Yes, I remember. Why?'
'Because when you first began coming around after Sally, I asked you
what you were going to do when you left school. You looked me in the
eye. Your eyes weren't like any teenager I ever knew. They were fierce, like
a tiger's. You were insolent and arrogant and frightening. I told my
husband so.'
'I'm sorry for that.'
'You told me you were going to get rich. Not that you were going to
university or were after this or that job. Just that you were going to be rich.
I never forgot it.'
I made some inane reply and tried to jolly her along. But she wasn't
having any. The one advantage about being old is that you can say whatever
the damn hell you please and younger people have to listen to it.
She'd said her piece. She had no more to say. I left the funeral with a
double burden. Not just the death of an old friend, but the knowledge that
I had frightened a woman who had tried to be kind to me when I was a boy.
Not exactly an epitaph to be proud of, is it?
But she was right. I was like that. And so will you be. You will do
anything it takes, short of larceny, fraud, blackmail and murder. You will cut
yourself loose, but the tiger chained to your ankle will come right along with
you. He will always be with you, until the day you turn him loose by an
effort of will.
By cutting loose, you will be free to make a whopping great fortune
while your tiger scares the hell out of little old ladies. And old gentlemen for
that matter. And if you do not have a tiger handy, I suggest you acquire onequickly if you wish to amass serious wealth.
No matter. We are not here to discuss the rag-and-bone shop of your
heart or make metaphors about tigers.
Cut loose, my friend. Cut loose and get rich.
CHOOSE THE RIGHT MOUNTAIN
There stands a lady on a mountain,
Who she is I do not know,
All she wants is gold and silver;
I shall to the mountain go!
ANON. 'Kiss in THE RING'
The world is full of money. Some of that money has your name on it. All you
have to do is collect it.
If you are not just reading this hook for a bit of entertainment (nothing
wrong with that), and if you seriously do wish to  get rich, them I am going
to ask you to memorise the words below, close the book and repeat the
words again to yourself. Let's go:
THE WORLD IS FULL OF MONEY. SOME OF IT HAS MY
NAME ON IT. ALL I HAVE TO DO IS COLLECT IT.
Done that? OK, now we're rockin' and rollin'. The first question to answer
is where is the goddamn money? Let's imagine it is in a mine in a mountain.
Fine. Which mountain? The mountain that is already making a lot of other
people rich would be a good bet.
Gold rushes don't happen in old mines. There will be people making a
good living out of old mines, but they won't be too keen to let you muscle
in on their stake, Look for new mountains where gold is being mined; or will
be mined soon.
Let us speak plainly. This is not the time to begin a chain of car dealer-
ships. Car dealerships are great, but it's an old mine. Don't go there unless
you have a brand new angle. Making and distributing beer is an old mine.
Unless you have a new angle (like 'real ale'), then that's a mountain to
avoid. Of course, if you're really imaginative, you can often come up with
such an angle.
In St Vincent and the Grenadines, a small country of which I am a proudcitizen, there is a beer company. They make a good beer called Hairoun. I
expect the company makes decent money even though the entire country
only has 120,000 citizens. Could I muscle in on this market?
Yes.
How?
I would invent a new beer. I would print a number inside each bottle cap.
I would set up a lottery, with the agreement of the government. There
would be a draw once a month. Whoever produced the beer cap with the
winning number would win a substantial cash prize. Fifty per cent of the
lottery money would go to the winner. Ten per cent would go to the govern-
ment. Forty per cent would go to good causes — children in need, orphans,
education, that kind of thing.
I would then launch my beer with the kind of advertising blitz that St
Vincent and the Grenadines has never (mercifully) seen. I would make tele-
vision commercials where a bartender asks a good-looking Vincentian man
if he wants another beer. 'Sure,' he'll reply. "I'll have one for the widows and
orphans.' Big grin. Frothy beer slapped on the counter. Logos for the beer
explode on screen surrounded by falling money.
My beer would wipe the floor with Hairoun. (Hey! this is a hypothetical
example we're exploring here.) Everybody wants to get rich. Once a month
people smiling and holding a big cheque would appear on television adver-
tising my beer. I would begin exporting the beer to other islands and doing
the same trick there. What would I call my beer? Let's see: the slang for a
Vincentian citizen is 'Vincy'. That's it! I'll call it Vincy Beer. The slogan will
be: 'One for the Widows and Orphans'. Or: 'The Beer for Winners'.
(OK, OK, I'm not as good at making up marketing slogans as I am at
brewing beer.) So why have I told you this, and thereby warned the brewers
and distributors of Hairoun of my evil intentions concerning my (truly) great
idea? Easy. Because I have about a hundred good ideas every day. Ideas are
ten a penny. And because I have no intention of going into the beer busi-
ness. (Or is that a double bluff?)
You see, you have to choose a new mine where you suspect there is
money, or an old mine with a different angle to get rich. The right moun-
tain. A great new mine right now is in telecommunications, or the internet,
or legalised gambling. Property is always good. (You can start small in prop-
erty and you can get lucky quickly. It's a crowded market, though, for that
very reason.)It's vital you choose a mountain which produces money that has your
name on it. Your instinct should come into play here. Everything depends,
just for once, on what you feel drawn towards and what repels you. I have
always hated watching television. Paradoxically, I have always fancied being
a producer or director of mindless garbage. I think I missed a trick by not
going into television earlier - although one of my companies in Beverly Hills
is busy at it right now.
One thing is for sure, you must avoid the trap of going into what you
think will make you money if you have no empathy or feeling for what you
are about to do. There's no future in that.
I know an editor and writer. He's a great editor and writer. But he feels
he has to be a publisher and do all the stuff that publishers do - like wear
suits, write cheques and hire and fire people. He's crazy. He will never be
rich because he will not use his vast writing and editing talent to the full.
He's always too busy being a lousy businessman.
Avoid that trap. Don't do anything because you feel you have to. Go for
what attracts you. Go for something that exploits your natural talents.
Go to the mountain which produces money. Money that has your name
on it.
FEAR NOTHING
No passion so effectually robs the mind of all its powers
of acting and reasoning as fear.
EDMUND BURKE, THE SUBLIME A ND BEAUTIFUL
Fear nothing. Another easy-to-say and impossible piece of advice. Tough
luck, chum. Life's a bitch and then you die. Get used to it. It isn't going to
change any time soon.
What is there to fear? Everything and nothing. Try looking at it through
my eyes. I am an insignificant little worm on an insignificant planet which
circles an insignificant star in a big (presumably) bad universe. A universe I
will never comprehend, nor can ever hope to comprehend.
Just like everything that walks, breathes, grows, flies, crawls or swims, I
am going to die. One day, my planet will die. Long, long after, the sun it
still circles as a dead rock will die. Then there will be darkness on the face
of the earth. That is, there would be darkness if there was any creature alive
to view it.Armies and governments fear men or women who know they are going
to die soon; and they have good reason to. Such people have nothing to
lose. They will commit any atrocity and take as many others with them as
they can, if they are driven to it. You must now become that doomed man
or woman. Yon are going to die. Nothing can alter the fact. It is immutable.
Incomprehensible. Unfair. All those things.
But it sets you free, don't you see? It sets you free.
What does anything matter if you are going to die? Nothing matters.
Nothing at all. Get that through your terrified mind and you will wake up in
the morning ready to rip the throat out of the first gazelle unfortunate
enough to cross your path. Why would you rip its throat out? Because you
can. Not for breakfast. Not for the 'thrill of the chase'. But because you can.
If you want to be rich you must make a pact with yourself about fear of
anything. You cannot banish fear, but you can face it down, stomp on it,
crush it, bury it, padlock it into the deepest recesses of your heart and soul
and leave it there to rot.
Just try. Try for just a single day, a whole day when you refuse to
acknowledge fear of failure, fear of making yourself look like an idiot, fear of
losing your lover, fear of losing your job, fear of your boss, fear of anything
and of any kind. Fear will creep back, usually at three in the morning. Laugh
at it and tell it to take a hike. Smash it in the teeth. Spit on it. Put your arms
round it and make nicey-nicey. Then slip a sharp blade into its stinking throat
just as you're French-kissing it.
Go on. I dare you. If you can do it, this will transform your life. Not for
the better. I didn't promise you that. But you will instantly perceive (among
many other tilings) just how much money there is in the world and how piti-
fully easy it is to obtain it. Money that already has your name on it.
All that is stopping you is fear. I do not know of what kind. It may even
be fear of succeeding. But if you want to be rich, gentle reader, and if you
can read these words, then all that is stopping you is fear of one kind or
another. You have no one to blame but yourself. The world is full of gazelles
with diamonds in their guts.
Look! There's one over there, right now! Let's go rip its throat out and
take the diamond. Maybe there will be two diamonds. If there isn't, then I'm
keeping the first diamond, you understand? Otherwise I'll rip your throat
out, too. Come on! There's nothing to fear. Let's get rich!
That is what getting rich is going to be like. You will become a predator.A killer. You will cease to be prey. You will not succumb to fear. Others will
fear you. Especially gazelles bearing diamonds.
This will make no difference to an insignificant worm on an insignificant
planet circling an insignificant star. No difference whatever. Nothing can
hold back the coming dark. Nothing can alter the fact that you will cease one
day to breathe and think. Nothing can amend the truth, that within a few
million circlings of a rock around a dying sun, there will remain no trace of
you, your tribe, your race or your diamonds. Nothing can alter that.
But just for a moment (just for one moment, you understand?) just for a
heartbeat in the life of the planet, one little worm, who thinks he is a tiger,
will be rich.
Much of what I have written in this book may be wrong. Misguided.
'Tosh' as we used to say in my school playground. I accept that, I am far
from infallible on the subject of getting rich. But this last short essay
concerning fear and its influence is, I think, wholly true. It is fear that rules
us. Love and respect and other such emotions make it bearable, at a price.
But fear rules us all, and always has.
Which is odd. Because what can there be for us to fear, when each of us
knows we shall die eventually? Is it a definition of sentiency?
Fear is no bad thing, perhaps. I have been feeding a feral cat here on
Mustique in my new cottage for the last few weeks while I wrote this book.
She is a tabby I call Stringy because her tail is so thin. She comes to my  
porch
when I call twice a day. Yesterday, she finally pecked, and then edged, into
the cottage itself and padded across the Persian rugs. Within minutes, she
was playing with the rug tassels like a kitten. Maybe she had no kittenhood,
in the eat-or-be-eaten world of feral cats.
Yet she takes flight at the least sound or movement. If the refrigerator turns
itself on, or if I rise from my chair or move suddenly, she scoots to the door.
Why? She is safe here and must be beginning to sense the fact. She is eating
better than she has ever eaten in her life. She has grown used to the delicious
taste of cow's milk. Not to mention smoked salmon. So why does she flee?
Fear rules her life. That is why she flees. Fear keeps her safe from her
enemies - though there are no predators on the island to trouble her, except
man. Perhaps I should be careful not to cause her to lose her fear of humans
completely, even if I could do such a thing. Perhaps she is better off running
scared of her own shadow.To be rich, if that is still your desire, you must somehow learn to harness
fear to your own advantage. Is that what I have done in my own life? Was all
that rage and fierceness and drive and stamina rooted in my own fear? Have
I used fear as a fuel in the getting of money?
Perhaps I have, although I never thought of it that way before. In any case,
I'm not certain I want to know, I have never trusted armchair psychiatry.
But I do know that you must make an accommodation with your fears if
you are to succeed. At least, I know that to be true in my own case. As to  
how
such a trick is to be accomplished, I cannot help you. We each, in turn, must
face down our secret demons, if we can, whether we wish to be rich or not.
To succeed in the game of piling up material wealth, it becomes a necessity.
In the words of the wisest of men, William Shakespeare: 'Present fears are
less than horrible imaginings.'
Aye, that they are, William, that they are. 'Horrible imaginings' will rule
all our lives if we are fools enough to let them.
GO! GO! GO!
He either fears his fate too much,
Or his deserts are small,
That puts it not unto the touch
To win or lose it all.
JAMES GRAHAM, MARQUESS or MONTROSE, 'MY DEAR  AND ONLY LOVE'
You have little time to waste, gentle reader. Even as you read these words, a
clock is ticking and time is streaming by, governed by the speed of light,
racing towards a point where you will have no more need of clocks, or light,
or money,
So many hundreds of millions of dollars to make - so little time! What
are you waiting for?
We used to have an expression in the England of my youth: 'On yer
bike!1" And that's what you must be about shortly. On your bicycle and
pedalling for all you are worth against your only true enemy. Time. In four
of the most memorable lines in English poetry, Andrew Marvell, attempting
to persuade a young lass to come to his bed, put it thus:
Had we but world enough and time,
This coyness, lady, were no crime.The grave's a fine and private place,
But none, I think, do there embrace.
There's the nub of it. You have less time than you think. We all do. Why
then are you waiting to fulfil your perfectly legitimate, if foolish, desire? If
you do not start today, then when will you start? Tomorrow? Next year?
The year after?
You will never start unless you start NOW!
That's right. Right now. Even as your eyes scan this page, your brain
should be plotting and planning ideas and possibilities, weaving a web to
ensnare what you could achieve, if only you will cease this endless prevarica-
tion and commit yourself.
Commit yourself heart and soul, mind. Heart and soul. No half measures
or lukewarm approach is likely to succeed in what William Butler Yeats called
'this pragmatical, preposterous pig of a world'. Your quest is mad. What use
to muddy the waters with logic and statistics - bugaboos that will only serve
to discourage you from taking the plunge?
There is a place for impetuosity and leaps of faith. A place for belief. That
place is here. And the time is now. You must take your first steps on the long,
lonely road to wealth by beginning now, or you must hurl this book into the
fire, or out the window, for all the good it will do you.
When opportunities come you must pounce. Whether you are just start-
ing out or have been at it for a long while. If an opportunity should arrive
just as you are taking your family on vacation, for example, do not weaken.
Let the family go on without you or cancel the trip altogether. I can tell you
a true story of a man who lost millions and millions of pounds that were his
for the taking because he went on vacation.
The magazine that generated my first huge pile twenty-five years ago fell
to me when the managing director of a large rival suspended negotiations
with the founder of the magazine while he went abroad. He probably figured
the deal was nearly done and the seller could cool his heels for a week or two.
It wasn't important enough for him to change his travel plans.
Naturally enough, this angered the young man attempting to sell his
prized asset. It was disrespectful. By the time that managing director
returned from abroad, a majority interest in the magazine was mine, signed,
sealed and delivered to Dennis Publishing.
My rival deserved to lose out. He prevaricated. He wasted his opportu-
nity to purchase a magazine that has since generated way over $100,000,000in gross revenues. You can forgive yourself for not doing something if you
honestly got it wrong. But it is harder to forgive yourself when lack of impe-
tus allows it to slip through your fingers.
Need will drive you, but you must not prevaricate. You must act at the
slightest hint of a chance to make money. You must go, go, go!
My little feral cat, Stringy, crept into my cottage driven by desperate
need. She was hungry. She was reckless to enter. I might have slammed the
door, grabbed her and roasted her! How would she know otherwise? Yet in
she came, driven by want and desire. Now she feasts on the finest meat, fish
and milk money can buy - twice a day. She seized her opportunity.
You may have many reasons for caution and proceeding carefully. There
always are such reasons. They creep about a fearful mind like Tolkien's
Gollum, wearing spirit to a shadow and sapping optimism with dread. Cast
them out, these 'reasons'. They are nothing. They are sprites and fancies of
your imagination that will vanish if you so much as say boo! to their lick-
spittle goose.
If you wish to get rich, there are no reasons why you should not get rich.
None at all.
For they are not 'reasons'; they are excuses. For the most part they are
pitiful alibis, half truths and self-serving evasions you have erected to spare
yourself from the quiet terror of taking your own financial life in your hands
and making your dreams concrete reality. They are the children of fear and
the parents of a thousand 'if onlys'.
It may well be true, should you succeed, that you will discover you are
not as happy as you once believed wealth might make you. But is that a
reason for not beginning? Perhaps I will be proved wrong and you will
become rich and as happy as a lark in spring. Who knows? You will never find
out if you do not try, and if you do not begin trying now.
Believe me, I have heard all the reasons. They have been laid out for my
inspection on scores of occasions by people in a similar position to yourself.
Even by several of my godchildren. On close examination, they have all
proven to be bogus.
The only three valid reasons for not attempting to become rich are: 'I do
not wish to be rich.' Or, 'I wish to be rich but I have other priorities.' Or, 'I
am too stupid to try to get rich.'
These are valid reasons, especially the last. As for the second, what kindof a world would we live in if Vincent van Gogh had never painted, if
Beethoven had had no time to compose symphonies, if Emily Dickinson had
never written a poem or if Narcis Monturiol had not perfected the world's
first, fully fledged, double-hulled submarine? All of them died relatively poor
or flat broke. Nor have I ever read that giants of thought and philosophy
fared much better.
And what of your family? Ah, yes; what kind of a childhood would you
have had if your mother and father had abandoned you to a wet, dark cot
while they scrabbled day and night to become wealthy? So, yes, there are
valid reasons. But not many of us can lay claim to them. Most of us are ordi-
nary Joes. We will never compose a symphony or invent the modern subma-
rine. And a great many of us will not have children.
Which leads me to what, I suspect, will prove a controversial take on the
subject of having children and getting rich. Anyone who has not had a child
cannot know the depths of anguish and joy that parents endure. I accept that
as a childless man. But so often, children are used as a bogus trump card in
any debate on the central theme of this book.
'It's OK for you, but I have responsibilities. My family comes first.' Yes,
yes, yes. I am sure you feel better having got that off your chest. But how
much real truth is there in it?
I have many godchildren. I have watched, closely in some cases, as
newborn babes become toddlers, as young tykes shoot through school and
college and as body-pierced immortals launch themselves like demons of the
pit upon an unsuspecting world. And I have seen the relationship between
children and their parents alter. Close-up and personal.
It is my belief that children do not care if parents are rich or poor,
providing there is enough money for basic essentials like food, clothing and
shelter. What they care about is unconditional love. That is the only key the
* .'
only true priority, although they neither know it, nor say so, after five or six
years old.
In my formative years, I was brought up in surroundings that our polit-
ically correct age would describe as 'modest'. For part of my early childhood
we lived in my grandparents' tiny terraced house, two steps up from a slum
(although kept spotlessly clean) with no electricity, no kitchen that you
would recognise as one, and no indoor lavatory or bathroom. The tin bath
hung in the coal shed to keep it from going rusty. There was no heating buta coal fire in the parlour. No light but gas and candles.
In the affluent West, that's poor, my friend, any way you cut it. If times
were tight, the nasty, shiny Izal lavatory paper that came in a box would
vanish from the outside lavatory to be replaced by neatly torn squares of
newspaper hanging on a butcher's hook. Personally, I preferred the newspa-
per and always kept a secret stash in the garden shed.
Then my mother's career began to flourish and our lives changed. We
became 'middle class' overnight. I got a bike. There was a smart bathroom
in our new garden flat with a modern bath and hot water pouring out of
the tap. The lavatory paper came in soft, comfy rolls. We were allowed pets
and we had a lawn with a big tree to play cowboys and Indians in. Was I a
mite happier?
I don't believe so. I had a wonderful time in my grandparents' house. All
the other kids in the alley there were in the same boat. We didn't even know
we were poor. Material surroundings are of far more importance to adults
than children.
Logically, then, the excuse 'I have got responsibilities' can only refer in
most cases to the unconditional love part. Young children neither know nor
care if their mummy and daddy are rich. It doesn't enter into the equation.
But the unconditional love part, and especially its expression, are central to
any child's well-being.
Now you can see, perhaps, why I have little time for what appears, at
first, to be a Teflon-coated excuse. At least, in many cases. If you want to be
rich and you have young children, then do not use them as your alibi for not
making the attempt. Or, if you must use their existence as an alibi, then at
least have the courtesy, the decency, to acknowledge that such reasoning is
nothing but an alibi.
Of course, having young children and scrabbling to get rich is harder
than it is for those without children. I do not deny that. But it has been
done, and done thousands of times, to boot. It is not a fatal impediment,
merely another 'stone in your passway', as Robert Johnson would put it.
I happen to know a man, a relative of sorts, who has many of the char-
acter ingredients of an entrepreneur, and yet has remained poor all his life.
He is a pain in the neck. For years I had to listen to his blowhard spouting
about how many of his ideas would have changed the world, if only he had
not had children and 'responsibilities'.
Finally, I went out and bought him a copy of a Louis Jordan CD andplayed it to him at full blast. Here's one of the verses:
I been hearin' all about all your big ideas
Since you started. What's the hitch?
You ain't never made ten dollars yet,
Yet you say you can balance the national debt,
If you're so smart,
How come you ain't rich?
He blustered as usual, so I gave him my 'alibi' speech, in front of his wife
and children. Then I left the house, which was in uproar. I doubt I will ever
be invited back - which is fine by me.
His kids, who are fully grown, were in secret ecstasy when I played that
record. Fancy having to listen endlessly to a fathcr who, between the lines, is
blaming you for his and his wife's relative poverty. What a schmuck. What a
silly man.
Watch out for blowhards. There are a lot of them out there and they are
very negative influences. They can stop you from getting started, from
getting going, from taking a massive running leap into the dark. Always
remember that they want you to fail, just as they did. Ignore them.
That clock is still ticking. It's been travelling at the speed of light while
you read all this. Now is the time. Now is the hour. Let's go. Come on,
brother and sister, up off your idle butt. Let's find ourselves a gazelle with
diamonds in its entrails.
Time to go. Let's GO! GO! GO!
Let's go and get rich!THE UPSIDE-DOWN PYRAMID FOR GETTING RICH
1. Commit or don't commit. No half-measures.
2, Cut loose from all negative influences.
3. Choose the right mountain.
4. Fear nothing,
5. Start now.
6. Go!1 8
HOW TO
STAY RICH
So on we worked, and waited for the light,
And went without meat, and cursed the bread;
And Richard Cory, one dark summer night,
Went home and put a bullet through his head.
EDWARD ARLINGTON ROBINSON, 'RICHARD CORY'
You can skip this chapter if you want. It won't help you to get rich. But it
might help you stay rich. Big difference.
It's been fun. Writing this book, I mean. It's taken me nearly eight
weeks. But I have to get back to work now - planting trees, writing poetry,
making money. That sort of thing. So this chapter is an 'extra', if you like.
I'm writing it because I'm enjoying myself.
THE PERILS OF WEALTH
I'm no great prose writer (and no great philosopher, either) but I've read a
lot and lived a lot and made a lot and spent a lot - and played the fool with
it all to a highly satisfactory degree. Hundreds of millions of dollars have
'trickled down' (to use Margaret Thatcher's much-mocked, much-used
phrase) from my leaky fingers into the general economy and the outstretched
hands of various trades and professions and charities.
Wine and narcotic suppliers did exceptionally well out of me over the
years. So did real-estate agents, book sellers, young ladies of easy virtue and
upmarket British car manufacturers.
I spent a hell of a lot of what I made on sex and drugs and rock 'n' roll.
The rest - as the footballer, Georgie Best, joked just before he died recently
- I wasted. It's the usual old story. But whores have to make a living and so
do purveyors of French wine and single malt whisky.
(To be serious for a moment, some of the smartest, nicest people I ever
met in my life were whores. But only one of them, out of the hundreds I
have known, ever got rich. A Saudi Prince picked her up in a nightclub. The
rest is history. But she was one in a million. Whoring is a particularly danger-
ous and ineffective way of getting rich.)I'm afraid that the crack dealers have had a pretty thin time over the last
ten years from me because I gave it all up in a Damascene conversion. But I
did more than my bit for them in my foolish forties. Drugs can be great, for
a while, as I am forced to admit to my godchildren. Anyone who tells you
otherwise is either lying or ignorant. But they will very often kill you and
wreck your life. That is the problem. And, while they do it, they stop you
from getting rich. Better to forget about drugs and move on.
As for the wine merchants, I've been keeping careful count. By my reck-
oning, I have bought £790,000 worth of French wine over the last twenty
years. When I reach a million quid, I'm applying to the Frogs for a legion
d'honneur for services rendered. I won't get one, but the French wine trade,
when they read about it in the newspapers, will probably send a certificate
and a pretty ribbon for le madman rosbif. Maybe even a free crate or two of
Chateau Petrus!
Who else have I 'trickled down' my dosh to? Thousands of people have
earned their living working at companies I founded or co-founded and
hundreds still continue to do so. Printers and paper manufacturers, of course
- but that's a cost of doing business and doesn't really count.
Lawyers - they always do well. Accountants, and tax advisors, naturally.
Charities have done very nicely. Farmers have sold me thousands and thou-
sands of acres of land they no longer needed. And banks have made a pretty
penny from yours truly over the years. And art dealers. And Persian rug  
deal-
ers. And architects. And restaurant owners.
Oh, and the tax man. How could I forget him? One year I paid £10
million to the UK tax authorities - or maybe it was twenty million. I forget.
And they still tried to make me pay interest because I was one day late with
that cheque, the rotters. When the story got out, the newsreader Trevor
McDonald used it on News at Ten in his signature 'And finally...' slot.
Hilarious stuff- even the Inland Revenue thought so - but I still had to pay
them that one day's money.
By the way, I always pay the Inland Revenue by old-fashioned cheque
rather than by electronic transfer whenever I can. That way, I have a Xerox
copy of the cheque to pin up on my kitchen wall as a memento (there are a
lot of them on that wall) and the Revenue tend to lose a day or so's interest
to the clearing banks. Now two days' interest on £20 million would be, er...
oh, eight or nine thousand pounds, give or take. That's how clearing banks
get rich. I'd rather the banks got rich than the taxman.So is it true that 'Whoever Dies with the Most Toys Wins'?
Naaah. That's rubbish. It's like 'Greed is Good', which came later. Greed
ain't good. And toys are the last thing on your mind, lying on a bed of ice
and fire white nonchalant young ticks in white coats pull a face like they're
sucking a lemon before pronouncing your doom. You won't be worrying
about toys and gadgets then, except perhaps the respirator.
Making a lot of money is like piloting a ship. You cease to be a person to
many others. You become, instead, a freighter loaded to the gills with ingots.
They want some of that gold and they will go to any ends to get it, the worst
of them.
Here's John Donne, ostensibly writing about naval warfare, but he isn't,
you know.
A Burnt Ship
Out of a fired ship, which, by no way
But drowning, could he rescued from the flames,
Some men leap'd forth, and ever as they came
Neere the foe's ships, did by their shot decay;
So all were lost, which in the ship were found,
They in the sea being burnt, they in the burnt ship drowned.
He was clever dick, the preacher Donne. You'll have to watch you are neither
burnt nor drowned when you're the master of your own laden galleon. Wait
and see.
A lot of it I've given away. To friends, to good causes and charities and
the arts and children's education and relatives and to anything that took my
fancy in the newspaper that day. And to planting trees.
Seems daft, doesn't it? What was the point, then? Well, I can't tell you
what the point of making all that money was. Just because I could, I suppose.
And because I hated being poor all those years ago. Mind you, I'm still far
from poor. And I'm not finished yet, either. Not by a long chalk.
But it will all go eventually. Where it belongs. Back into the hands of
those who need it and, perhaps, to some who don't. But let's not get
maudlin. Here's a poem to cheer you up.Pitch and Toss
For thirty years, at pitch and toss,
In Mammon's inky halls,
I hurled benighted dice across
The stone of hazard's walls,
And little reckoned win or loss.
The game was all; the rest was dross.
As living ghosts, a world apart,
We toiled in lucre's maze,
The sun shut out of each man's heart,
The glittering lamps ablaze;
We little reckoned stop from start,
The Midas touch was all our art.
In frenzied play, at fever pitch,
We sought to build our store,
While Lady Luck, that slattern bitch,
Would taunt us from the door;
We little reckoned who was which:
The newly poor, the newly rich.
And there I built my dragon hoard
Of silver and of gold,
And bound it with a miser's cord
To gnaw when I grew old.
And little reckoned fire or sword,
And thought myself a mighty lord.
'Til, falling sick at last, I stepped
To seek the open sky,
To bribe the guards with all I'd kept
To lead me out to die.
I little reckoned as I wept
That joy into my soul had crept.But joy in want, is joy deferred,
And paupers' lives are short,
fat worms are for the early bird
And I was fit for nought;
A fool might reckon what occurred:
They took me back without a word.
So did I learn anything? Anything you might find useful when you become
rich yourself? Yes, I did. Here are a few truths I discovered the hard way,
some of them concerned with the immediate aftermath of getting rich,
and some concerned with staying rich, not to mention relatively sane.
Relatively, mind.
O Keep giving it away.  The faster you give it away, the more money will
flow back to you. Not because of 'karrna' or 'universal cosmic forces', but
became you then spend less time defending it and more time making more
of it. Investing in private companies you think can do well is another sensi-
ble ruse to staying rich, but giving it away on a continual basis is a surer
route. By the way, when you do start giving it away, find someone to do it
for you. Most of my money is given away by a lovely lady accountant called
Catherine Bishop, and she does a far better job of it than I.
O As soon as you've spent it, gifted it, loaned it or invested it, forget
it. More angst and worry comes into the world from concern over past
investments, loans or gifts than can be imagined. It's gone, forget it. If any
of it returns to you, fine. But that should not be your primary concern,
unless you invested for safety's sake. Which is a different matter. All you did
with that type of 'investment' was take a punt or make a gift. Do not waste
time playing the 'blame game' over investments, loans or outright gifts,
however large. The blame, if there is any, is yours,
O Never loan it to friends.  If you loan money to a friend, you will lose
your friend as well as your money. Give them whatever you feel like giving.
Then forget it. Ditto with relatives. If you diligently follow this one piece of
advice, you wilt be saved a sackful of misery. Trust me. Broadcast your policy
loudly. This will spare you from many embarrassing demands that will other-
wise vex you.
O Get 'first flush' barminess out of your system as fast as possible.
You're going to do it if you get rich. Yes, you are. You are going to buy a
sodding great big house, then more houses abroad, then servants by any
other name, then you are going to start misbehaving. Gambling. Credit-cardabuse. Expensive clothes. Whores. Drugs. Drink. Fast cars. Private jets. Big
parties. Interior designers. Gold taps. The lot. This probably can't be
avoided. But the sooner you can work through this 'barmy' phase, the better
your health will stand up, and the sooner you will get your second wind.
O Your oldest friends are your only friends.  Sad. Very sad. But true. And
not alt those old friends will be comfortable with the new disparity in wealth
between you and them. You'll have to wait and see which. And, surprisingly,
you will have to work on those friendships for quite a while. They're impor-
tant to you, believe me. Only your old, trusted mates can tell you when to
get off. Will dare tell you that you're out of order. But why should you have
to reach out to them? Because ...
O Get used to being 'cut off'.  I do not carry a mobile phone or any
communications device on my person. At least, not one anyone knows
anything about. No one has my email address, because I refuse to register
one. I never will. I am very hard to reach and that's deliberate. Only a very
few trusted aides, business associates and my lover can reach me day or night.
And sometimes, not even then. If you do not begin to isolate yourself pronto
when you get rich, then you will be driven mad pretty swiftly. At least that's
my experience. It isn't that you have changed so much, (although believe me,
you have), it is simply that you are now a loaded galleon, a supertanker, and
all the pirates have lookouts. There just isn't enough time in the world to
deal with them all. Avoid them instead.
O Avoid developing 'plate-glass vision'.  It's true you want to be  
difficult
to reach, but that doesn't mean you should allow yourself to develop what
Bob Dylan called 'plate-glass vision'. No need for that. I often eat at the
same small restaurants I always did in London and New York. They know
I've done well, but the staff there have no idea how well. I drop by my
companies without notice and chew the fat with employees and managers
regularly. I invite many of them to visit me at my private office, one on one.
Even with my poetry, I go on the road on long tours and let the audience
tell me what they think, face to face. In Mustique, I often invite yachtie
strangers I've met at the local bar up for a shower and a drink or a meal - to
their astonishment, usually. 'Plate-glass vision' won't make you poor, but it
will drive you crazy.
O Develop a passion outside of making money.  Fast. If I had made the
time earlier to discover that I could write poetry that thousands of people
would be kind enough to purchase and enjoy, I would have saved myself  
manytorments of the pit. People who can make money are often easily bored.  
That
is true of me. So when the day's work was finally done, I used to make my  
own
entertainment. There's nothing intrinsically wrong with orgies, parties,
narcotics and booze - but they will kill you in the end. If I had spent the  
thou-
sands of nights writing poetry that I spent playing the fool to keep boredom
at bay, I would be a happier, healthier man today. And a better poet to boot!
O Get your own private advisors.  The professionals who help run your
company must be first class. The professionals who run your private wealth
for you must be even classier. There is no substitute for a first-class lawyer,
tax advisor, accountant, auditor, estate manager and business advisor. None.
You will get into a ton of trouble if you don't search them out, appoint
them, and make your peace with them at the earliest opportunity. Avoid the
errors I made in my first few years of being rich. Do this earlier than you
think is necessary. You'll understand why later.
O Watch out for fraud in the early days.  When you first hit pay dirt,  
you
will not have the systems in place to detect fraud swiftly. That happened to
me. A bent accountant siphoned off tens of thousands of pounds from my
company before he was caught. That was a lot of money back then. Money
I could not afford. (The scumbag's name was Ian F . You see, I
haven't forgotten, Ian, you little toad.) How was he caught? He went on
holiday and his deputy got suspicious of some stuff she found in the mail.
Never trust a senior accountant who will not use their allotted vacation time!
And install good accounting systems the second you can afford it.
O Do not try to be friends with your staff.  When you are worth several
hundred or a thousand times what a member of your staff is worth  
financially
(do the math), then trying to be friends with them or encouraging them to
be friends with you is silly. They know it's phony and you know it's phony, 
and
they know that you know. Not being friends comes with the territory. Being
fair and friendly is always cool. Trying to be 'one of the boys' is pathetic.
O Do not sleep with your staff.  It's dumb. It's unfair. And it sucks.  
Period.O Choose personal aides with enormous care.  You may spend more  
time
with your PA, your chauffeur or your business manager than with your
husband, wife or lover. Or even, sadly, than with your children. If a personal
aide is not working out, then fire him or her just as soon as you know. But
be very generous when you do so. Tell them it's your fault - it probably is.
Close aides like these can become your friends, and usually do, over time.
That's understandable. But try to keep a little distance 'just in case'. Ensure
they are employed under a very different contract than employees of your
company. They must work for you, not your company.
O Don't abuse it.  The maitre d' in your favourite restaurant doesn't mind
being verbally abused. He's paid to be. He knows you will have to award  
him
a huge tip next time if you want that 'special' table. Even your close aides  
will
be prepared to put up with the odd temper tantrum and hissy fit. But your
company's employees are not paid on that basis, and nor are the employees of
other companies you come into contact with. They most certainly do not
appreciate being verbally assaulted. Oddly, I could shout and rage a lot easier
in the old days with my company staff. We were all in it together, then. And
anyway, they shouted right back. But not now. Unless you are a president,
managing director or CEO of your company, keep your feelings about an
employee's abilities to yourself in public. Being rich doesn't give you the right
to abuse anyone.
O Be safe. If you make a lot of money, then it's foolish not to look to your
security. Even speaking to 'security advisors' is weird - you feel like a fraud or
a B-movie actor. Get over that. Quickly. No need to get paranoid about it, but
effective security for you and your family has to become a priority. If you get
rich enough, you will end up with your own security force, as I have. It's a
pain, and I still feel like a fraud, but the alternative isn't worth contemplating.
O Never stop looking for talent and promoting talent.  This single
suggestion will keep anyone rich. Talent is all most companies consist of.
Talented people are crucial to keeping your company humming right along
and growing. As the owner, you have the right to seek out talent, both inside
and outside of your company. You have the right to insist it is promoted or
hired. Make use of that last right. If you get known for making use of it, the
talent will start coming to you.
O No deal is a 'must-do' deal.  It's easy to get carried away when you are
in pursuit of a sweet deal. But more entrepreneurs get themselves in troubleby overreaching than exercising discipline. No deal is a total make-or-break
deal. Not one. If you cannot get the terms you know make sense, then walk
away. This is one occasion when you have the right to overrule senior
management in your company, if you feel strongly enough. Listen hard. But
if you are not convinced, insist they walk away.
O Lead. Do not be lead.  You have employed a bunch of talented boys and
girls who are smarter than you. Great. But you are their leader. If you sniff
an opportunity, then get them to consider it. If they prevaricate, call a meet-
ing and brainstorm. If they still won't get excited, then take the project into
your private office or somewhere else and begin it there. Do not leave the
opportunity within the company to be sabotaged, focus-grouped and
committeed to death - which is almost certainly what will happen to it. Your
employees and advisors are just that: employees and advisors. You are the
owner. You must follow your instincts. You must lead.
O Stay as healthy as you can.  I have no advice to offer on this subject -
and no right to offer any. I'm rich, not a hypocrite. But staying healthy long
enough to enjoy your wealth must make some kind of sense.
O If you're bored with a business, sell it.  You will not be able to disguise
your lack of passion for a business if you fall out of love with it. Your lack of
enthusiasm leaks out of you and infects those around you. They can sense it
and they will find it hard to forgive and easy to emulate. Sell that particular
business pronto. Then go and invest in something that doesn't bore you.
O Try to sell before you have to.  You're an entrepreneur. Your compa-
nies are not your 'babies', they are tools for acquiring wealth. Try to sell
them before they peak. Buyers require what is called 'blue sky' (further
growth) to get excited and offer a great price. I'm bad at this, sometimes.
Fortunately, my American partners, Peter and Bob, are good at it. And,
usually, they are right.
O Retirement will kill you.  It's official! Retirement kills the kind of people
who make their own pile. I do know one couple, old friends called Don and
Sue, who squirrelled away a million bucks or two (plus a house) and travel
quite happily, and very modestly, for most of the year. They go to India and
Indonesia and other such places. Or else stay with friends, like me. They love
their life, and are content to live on the interest from their investments. But
they are the only ones I know who ever really retired contented.
Interestingly, Don always predicted he would retire early; long before he
made any money. Still, for most men and women who have made a lot of
money, retirement is usually a living death sentence.O Remember you are only richer than them.  Not smarter than them.
If you do not employ a great many people smarter than you in your
company, you are either Albert Einstein reincarnated or a fool. Making
money doesn't mean you are smart. Having a posh car, a fancy office and
wearing a $5,000 suit doesn't make you smart. Being surrounded by tech-
nology, research and cool gadgets does not make you smart. Living in a big
house does not make you smart. It makes you rich. The sun does not shine
out of your backside. You are not infallible. You are neither the Pope nor
Albert Einstein.
Here's my favourite story about the 'infallibility' of power. It concerns a
man in charge of a billion dollars' worth of machinery who thinks he knows
everything. The transcript was released (rather mischievously) by the chief of
British Naval Operations in 1995, from a recorded radio conversation over-
heard at sea near the coast of British Columbia.
Navy voice:      Please divert your course 15 degrees to the north to
avoid a collision.
Civilian voice:  Recommend you divert your course 15 degrees to the
south to avoid a collision.
Navy voice:      This is the captain of a US navy ship. I say again, divert
your course.
Civilian voice:  No. I say again, divert your course.
Navy voice:      This is the aircraft carrier Enterprise. We are a large
warship of the US navy. Divert your course now!
Chilian voice: This is a lighthouse. Your call.
Oh, boy. Naturally, that officer of the watch can never have lived it down.
He will be nicknamed 'Your Call' or 'Lighthouse' until the day he retires. All
those years of saluting and keeping his nose to the grindstone destroyed in
moments, because he believed the sun shone out of his backside.
Can you imagine saluting such a man? You would be giggling uncon-
trollably in seconds. Screw 'infallibility' and bring on the Awkward Squad.
These are the senior professionals and talent you have installed in your
organisation. If they are paid and incentivised right, you will not be able to
persuade them that the 'moon is made of Stilton cheese' or that you are
infallible. That's what you employed them for in the first place, remember?
So you could get rich and stay rich.It's your call. Believe in your own bullshit and grow steadily poorer, or
listen to the people you employ and get richer and richer. I tried it the first
way in the early days. When that didn't work, I got sensible and started a
policy of deliberately employing men and women who were smarter than I
was - and listening to them. It works every time.
The trick to staying rich is balance. I guess Lao Tsu, or whoever it was
wrote the Tao Te Ching back in the sixth century EC, would say that all of
life, all of existence, is about balance. By seeking to make oneself richer  
than
one's neighbour, that balance is destroyed.
And maybe Lao Tsu was right.
But it is amazing how many philosophers and academics and wise men I
have ended up paying the restaurant bill for, over the years. Call me cynical.
Call me whatever you like - I probably deserve it. But I just don't think I
was put on this earth to wax philosophical too often, except occasionally in
my poetry.
I was put on this earth to get rich. To collect money that already had my
name on it.
And then to give it all away.
Now there's balance for you!
Stay rich!1 9
THE EIGHT
SECRETS TO
GETTING RICH
THE EIGHT SECRETS TO GETTING RICH
1.Analyse your need. Desire is insufficient. Compulsion is mandatory.
2.Cut loose from negative influences. Never give in. Stay the course.
3.Ignore 'great ideas'. Concentrate on great execution.
4.Focus. Keep your eye on the ball marked 'The Money Is Here'.
5.Hire talent smarter than you. Delegate. Share the annual pie.
6.Ownership is the real 'secret'. Hold on to every percentage point you can.
7.Sell before you need to, or when bored. Empty your mind when nego-
tiating.
8.Fear nothing and no one. Get rich. Remember to give it all away.
Fear not. For fear itself is fed by fear,
And all fears pass. Did no one tell you so?
Come take my hand, my friend, and we will peer
Into this fear's abyss. And jump! And know.
There are secrets and mysteries in the world. I doubt, however, that many of
them are of much consequence to the subject of this little book.
Looking for the 'secret' to getting rich is not a sensible exercise. If there
are such secrets, then I have never discovered them.
But, as humans love lists and 'secrets', here is my best shot at a very short
list. A kind of 'secret' recap. The essence, if you will, of what I have learned
along the way. (Strangely, compiling such a list is rather like writing a poem.
You have to strip out any word not absolutely essential. Like the word
'absolutely', for instance!)2 0
R E M E M B E R
TO DUCK!
And I dream of the days when work was scrappy,
And rare in our pocket the mark of the mint,
And we were angry, and poor find happy,
And proud of seeing our names in print.
G. K CHESTERTON , 'A SONG OF DEFEAT'
So that's it. That's how I got rich and how you can, too. If you want to. I
won't blame you if you don't. Far from it. There are far more important things
in life than money. (Spoken like the rich, hypocritical beastie you are, Dennis!)
It may well be that I have unintentionally led you astray. The middle-
aged and the old are always doing that to the young. Just as any system leads
us astray. In the words of John Gall, writing about 'Systemantics' twenty
years ago in The Whole Earth Catalogue:
Systems tend to oppose their own proper function. Systems tend to
malfunction just after their greatest triumph. [We all] have a strong
tendency to apply a previously successful strategy to the new challenge.
The army is now fully prepared to fight the last war.
There is truth in that. My 'system' may prove useless to you. But much of
what I have written about was true long before the birth of capitalism, or
even the beginning of recorded history, let alone the birth of 'Systemantics',
whatever that may be. Technology changes. Tools change. The social land-
scape changes. Human nature does not change.
If you wish to make any comments concerning this book you can do so
via www.felixdennis.com. It's mainly an all-singing, all-dancing poetry site,
but there's a section set aside specially for How To Get Rich. I do not prom-
ise to answer comments or enquiries, but I do promise to read them all.
While you are up on the site, check out my poetry and treat yourself to
one of my poetry collections. There's plenty of advice about getting rich
in those!
Good luck on your quest if you decide to undertake it. And remember
the words of Benjamin Jowett: 'Never retreat. Never explain. Get it done
and let them howl.'The first step? Just do it
And bluff your way through it.
Remember to duck!
God speed ...
and Good Luck!ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book was the result of a dinner conversation. I had written a review for
the business magazine Management Today about a book called Blink: The
Power of Thinking Without Thinking by Malcolm Gladwell. He's the same
chap who wrote The Tipping Point.
One of the guests around the table had read it. He thought it was OK;
not exactly sensational, but OK. 'Seems a bit silly to write a whole book
about one observation, though. He's talking about intuition, although he
won't use the word. What did you think, Felix?'
I told him I thought it was bunkum. Snake oil. Just like every other so-
called self-help book I ever stumbled away from at an airport bookstall.
'What the world needs,' I thundered, 'is an anti-self-help book. A book that
tells people how hard it is to be a great manager or a great anything. About
how hard it is to get rich. Bugger the glib insights!'
'They'd never buy it,' my friend smiled, 'People buy dreams, they don't
buy reality. They want it made easy. They want a promise a fool could keep.'
'We'll see,' I growled, an idea forming in my mind. 'Not one of those
books was written by anyone who actually got rich - except by writing drivel
for cretins. And I've got my godchildren to be thinking of. Pass me the  
wine,
Marie-France. Hmmm, we'll see.' Marie-France rolled her eyes and passed
me the wine.
So here we are with How to Get Rich. I want to thank Gail Rebuck, the
boss of Random House UK, who invited me into her beautiful London
home and locked me up in a cupboard until I agreed to write it. I want to
thank Sue Freestone at Hutchinson, to whom I originally sent my first
synopsis. And to my old friend, the agent Ed Victor, who let slip a pearl of
wisdom when I mentioned the project in passing.
And I especially need to thank my editor, Fiona MacIntyre, and her crew
at Ebury. Perhaps they will all become very rich indeed after taking such care
with my manuscript. They certainly deserve to.
I want to thank good friends, especially Don, Sue, Dick, Marion, Eric
and Steve, who sat in my Mustique dining pavilion as I read them yet
another a new chapter, hot off the laser writer. 'Under a wide and starry sky',
while the tree frogs whistled and the cicadas hummed in staccato unison, we
disputed points and chapters with all the vehemence and wit that only theblessing of good wine seems to provide - at least around my dinner table.
Suzen Murakoshi gently reminded me, as she always does, to be kind but
ruthlessly honest in my book; otherwise there would be no point in it. This,
among many others, is a particular talent of hers. Moni Mannings, too,
brought her talents to play with many insightful observations.
I am grateful to Caroline Rush, my personal assistant, who shepherded
the whole project through its various incarnations. As I am to my other
assistants, Wendy, Amy, Sharon, Michael and Toby, for keeping the world
at bay while I wrote and wrote. Not to mention the guys and girls who run
my companies while I do such crazy tilings: Alistair Ramsay, Brett
Reynolds, Stephen Colvin, John Lagans and James Tye. And to Ian
Leggett and Catherine Bishop who look after my money, and to David
Bliss who ensures the home fires, wherever they are, are not burning. To
them all, my thanks.
As to my long-time partners, Peter and Bob, they are the real heroes of
this book. Because, in truth, they helped me make most of my money. The
pair of them have never let me down. Not once in thirty years. Much of  
what
I learned along the way, I learned from them.
Thanks are due, too, to my old friend, the writer Chris Rowley, who I
asked to do some research. Some research? Hah! Chris waded through fifty
of those airport self-improvement manuals with names like Sleep Yourself  
into
Making Millions or Become a Genghis Khan Wall Street Warrior. Greater 
love
hath no man ...
And to the companion of my heart, Marie-France, as always, and to my
mother, who will not be pleased to read about herself in this book. But hey!
I'm fifty-eight years old. A man has to stand up to his mother sooner or
later. Right?
And to a tiny feral cat called Stringy, who crept around my writer's
cottage on Mustique while I wrote all this. I can never mend her broken tail.
But she has allowed me to stroke her now. And soon, she will allow me to
pick her up. Smart as paint, like all her tribe, she has already discovered that
the vent from a refrigerator is the warmest place in an air-conditioned room.
Not to mention that the very same refrigerator appears to contain an inex-
haustible supply of smoked salmon, milk and roast ham.Lastly, I wish to say thank you to my fellow homeowners on Mustique, and
to the Mustique Company, run by my friend the Hon. Brian Alexander, and
to the people of St Vincent and the Grenadines, a country of which I am now
a proud citizen. Making money might be important, but so is getting away
from it all. St Vincent and the Grenadines is the least spoilt group of islands in
the whole of the Caribbean. They are stunningly, heartbreakingly beautiful.
My advice to you, gentle reader, is to come here and visit the rain forest,
the volcano, the waterfalls, the empty, sun-kissed beaches and the quiet bays
and keys. You will find a smiling face around each corner and a green flash
in every sunset. This is as close to paradise as it gets. And you don't have to
be that rich to come join us!