Eddie Futch's approach to training was very effective for him as a fighter, and he wanted to share this with his fighters. He had created a novel training technique based on the use of sparring mitts, which allowed him to work closely with his fighters in the ring during real time. This added another dimension to his instruction, helping him build personal rapport with his fighters and develop effective counter-strategies based on studying videos of their opponents.

Despite all this hard work and dedication, Roach felt that something was missing. He noticed that his boxers often went their own way during actual fights or only enacted a part of the strategy he had devised for them. His winning percentage was good but not great. Reflecting on his own experience as a fighter under Futch, Roach realized that he had never had a complete understanding of the whole picture or the overall strategy.

Trying to feel his way through to a process that would bring better results, Roach decided he needed to do for his fighters what had never been done for him in his own career—give them a sense of the complete picture of the fight. He wanted them to enact this script over all rounds and deepen the connection between fighter and trainer.

Roach began by expanding the mitt work, making it not just a component in the training process but the focal point. Through hours of sparring with his fighters, he could almost get inside their skin, feeling their punches and getting a sense of their rhythm and footwork. He could alter their moods and focus by the intensity of the mitt work he did with them.

With his extensive experience as a fighter since he was six years old, Roach had a feel for every square inch of the ring. Training his fighters for hours with the mitt work, he could imprint into them his own sixth sense for the space itself, deliberately maneuvering them into bad positions so they could feel in advance how they were approaching such a dangerous space. In the same way, he would impart several ways to avoid such dead positions.

One day while studying a video of an opposing fighter, Roach had an epiphany—his way of watching fights was too tactical and focused on technique rather than strategy. He realized that in order to succeed as a trainer, he needed to develop a broader perspective and understanding of the sport.

Based on these discoveries, Roach crafted a complete strategy that had built-in flexibility. Depending on what the opponent showed in the first round, he would have ready several options for his own fighter that would surprise and upset the opponent, keeping them on their heels and in react mode. His strategy encompassed the entire fight. If necessary, his own fighter could sacrifice a round or two without ever losing control of the overall dynamic.

As Roach's fighters began to implement these strategies during actual fights, he started to feel an absolute connection with them. He had developed a clear vision of the whole picture—the spirit of the opponent, how to dominate the ring space within each round, and the overall strategy to win the fight. Watching his fighters slowly wear down their opponents by exploiting their habits and getting inside their heads just as he had taught them to, Roach experienced an ultimate satisfaction of controlling both the mind of his own fighter and that of the opponent's.

His winning percentage began to climb to unprecedented levels in the sport. His success extended beyond Manny Pacquiao, the main fighter in his stable, to nearly all of his boxers. Since 2003, he has been named Boxing Trainer of the Year five times, with no other previous trainer receiving the award more than twice. It seems that in modern boxing, Freddie Roach is now in a class all by himself.