Arti in Florence, Italy. In 1995 he cofounded Viaweb, the first application service provider that allowed users to set up their own Internet stores. After Yahoo! acquired Viaweb for close to $50 million (and renamed it Yahoo! Store), Graham went on to write a highly popular series of online essays about programming, tech startups, the history of technology, and art. Inspired by the reaction to a talk he gave at the Harvard Computer Society in 2005, Graham created Y Combinator, an apprenticeship system that provides seed funding, advice, and mentorship to young tech entrepreneurs. It has since become one of the most successful tech incubators in the world. Its portfolio of over two hundred companies is currently worth more than $4 billion, and includes DropBox, Reddit, loopt, and AirBnB. He has published two books: On Lisp (1993) about the computer programming language, and Hackers and Painters (2004). His online essays can be viewed at PaulGraham.com.
Temple Grandin was born in 1947 in Boston, Massachusetts. At the age of three she was diagnosed with autism. Through special mentoring and work with a speech therapist, she slowly mastered the language skills that allowed her to develop intellectually and to attend various schools, including a high school for gifted children where she excelled in science. Grandin went on to receive a bachelor's degree in psychology from Franklin Pierce College, a master's degree in animal science from Arizona State University, and a doctorate in animal science from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. After graduation, she worked as a designer of livestock-handling facilities. Half the cattle in the United States are handled by equipment she has designed. Her work in this area is devoted to making more humane, stress-free environments for animals in slaughterhouses. For this purpose, she has created a series of guidelines that are now widely used in the industry. She is the author of several books, including her autobiography, "Thinking in Pictures," which was adapted into a 2010 HBO movie.
Vilfredo Pareto was an Italian economist, sociologist, engineer, and philosopher. He is best known for his study of income distribution and his formulation of the Pareto Principle (also known as the 80-20 rule), which states that 80% of consequences come from 20% of causes. In economics, this principle has been applied to everything from product development to marketing strategies. He was also a prolific writer and researcher who published numerous books and papers on topics ranging from biology to sociology.
Freddie Roach is an American boxing trainer and former fighter. He began training as a boxer at the age of six and turned professional in 1978. After retiring as a fighter in 1986, he apprenticed as a trainer under legendary coach Eddie Futch, then started his own career several years later, opening Wild Card Boxing Club in Hollywood, California, where he now trains his stable of fighters. As a trainer, Roach has worked with 28 world champion boxers including Manny Pacquiao, Mike Tyson, Oscar De La Hoya, Amir Khan, Julio Cesar Chavez Jr., James Toney, and Virgil Hill. He is also the coach of UFC Welterweight Champion Georges St. Pierre and one of the top female boxers in the world, Lucia Rijker. In 1990, Roach was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease, but has been able to largely control the effects of it through medication and his rigorous training regimen. Among his numerous awards, he has been named Trainer of the Year by the Boxing Writers Association of America an unprecedented five times, and was recently inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame. He is the focus of the current HBO series "On Freddie Roach."
Cesar Rodriguez Jr. was born in 1959 in El Paso, Texas. After graduating from the Citadel, the Military College of South Carolina, with a degree in business administration, he entered the Air Force Undergraduate Pilot Training Program and was trained as a command fighter pilot on the F-15, among other jets. He slowly rose through the ranks, becoming major in 1993, lieutenant colonel in 1997, and full colonel in 2002. He compiled over 3,100 fighter flight hours, 350 of which were in combat operations during Operation Desert Storm (1991) and the Yugoslav War (1999). He is credited with downing three enemy aircraft—two Iraqi MiG fighters during Operation Desert Storm and a Yugoslavian Air Force MiG during the Yugoslav War. Rodriguez commanded the 332nd Expeditionary Operations Group during Operation Iraqi Freedom (2003). He retired from the air force in 2006 and is currently employed by Raytheon as the director of International Programs. Among his numerous medals, he has been awarded three Distinguished Flying Crosses, the Legion of Merit, and the Bronze Star.