Balanced Communication—Paying Attention to Cues—Looking for Common Emotional Experiences—Reading People Intuitively—Looking for Patterns—The Danger of First Impressions General Knowledge—The Seven Deadly Realities Envy Conformism Rigidity Self-obsessiveness Laziness Flightiness Passive Aggression Social Intelligence and Creativity STRATEGIES FOR ACQUIRING SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE 1. Speak Through Your Work A. Ignaz Semmelweis B. William Harvey Teresita Fernández Temple Grandin Joseph von Sternberg Daniel Everett Paul Graham V. Awaken the Dimensional Mind: The Creative-Active As you accumulate more skills and internalize the rules that govern your field, your mind will want to become more active, seeking to use this knowledge in ways that are more suited to your inclinations. Instead of feeling complacent about what you know, you must expand your knowledge to related fields, giving your mind fuel to make new associations between different ideas. In the end, you will turn against the very rules you have internalized, shaping and reforming them to suit your spirit. Such originality will bring you to the heights of power. The Second Transformation Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart Keys to Mastery The Original Mind—the Conventional Mind—the Dimensional Mind—Interpretation of Mozart Story —The Three Essential Steps Step One: The Creative Task Altering your concept of creativity—searching for the Great White Whale—Thomas Edison, Rembrandt, Marcel Proust, and the ultimate creative challenges—The Primary Law of the Creative Dynamic—finding something to rebel against—remaining realistic—letting go of security Step Two: Creative Strategies A. Cultivate Negative Capability Keats on the creative process—definition of Negative Capability—Mozart and Bach—Einstein and Negative Capability—Shakespeare as ideal—Faraday on humility—Negative Capability as a tool to open the mind B. Allow for Serendipity The brain as a dual processing system—definition of “serendipity”—William James and mental momentum—maintaining openness of spirit—Louis Pasteur and serendipity—Thomas Edison, serendipity, and the recording of sound—the fluid mind—serendipity strategies of Anthony Burgess and Max Ernst—cultivating serendipity—analogical thinking and Galileo Step Three: The Creative Breakthrough—Tension and Insight The high internal standards of Masters—letting go—Einstein, letting go, and the discovery of relativity—Richard Wagner completing his opera in a dream—how the brain reaches peaks of creativity—blocks that precede enlightenment—Evariste Galois’s sudden burst of genius—the need for tension—manufacturing deadlines—Thomas Edison’s manufacture of pressure Emotional Pitfalls Complacency Conservatism Dependency Impatience Grandiosity Inflexibility STRATEGIES FOR THE CREATIVE-ACTIVE PHASE 1. The Authentic Voice John Coltrane August Strindberg VI. Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational: Mastery All of us have access to a higher form of intelligence, one that can allow us to see more of the world, to anticipate trends, to respond with speed and accuracy to any circumstance. This intelligence is cultivated by deeply immersing ourselves in a field of study and staying true to our inclinations, no matter how unconventional our approach might seem to others. This power is what our brains were designed to attain, and we will be naturally led to this type of intelligence if we follow our inclinations to their ultimate ends. The Third Transformation Marcel Proust KEYS TO MASTERY Examples of Masters seeing more—the fingertip feel—a power that is mystified—high-level intuition —The Dynamic—gaining an intuitive feel for the whole—Jane Goodall’s feel for chimpanzees—Erwin Rommel’s feel for battle—the fusing of the rational and the intuitive—mastery at 20,000 hours—time as a crucial factor—make study time qualitatively rich—interpretation of Proust story The Roots of Masterly Intuition The Ammophila wasp—intuition and our primitive ancestors—mnemonic networks in the brain—Bobby Fischer and memory traces—engaging with complexity—gaining a tolerance for chaos—increasing memory capacity—examples of high-level intuition and youthfulness The Return to Reality Overview of evolution from the beginning—the interconnectedness of all life—the ultimate reality—our modern Renaissance—returning to the whole—the altered brain of the Master STRATEGIES FOR ATTAINING MASTERY 1. Connect to your environment—Primal Powers The Caroline Islanders 2. Play to your strengths—Supreme Focus Albert Einstein Temple Grandin The Fingertip Feel Cesar Rodriguez 3. Transform yourself through practice—The Life Force and Leonardo da Vinci 4. Widen your vision—The Global Perspective Freddie Roach 5. Submit to the other—The Inside-out Perspective Daniel Everett 6. Synthesize all forms of knowledge—The Universal Man/Woman Johann Wolfgang von Goethe REVERSAL The false self—the true self—genius demystified—your purpose in life—realizing your potential Contemporary Master Biographies Acknowledgments Selected Bibliography Introduction The Ultimate Power Everyone holds his fortune in his own hands, like a sculptor the raw material he will fashion into a figure. But it’s the same with that type of artistic activity as with all others: We are merely born with the capability to do it. The skill to mold the material into what we want must be learned and attentively cultivated. —Johann Wolfgang von Goethe