He was now an entertaining and engaging speaker, one who could hold the attention of an audience better than most. They could not imagine how this had come about, which made her transformation seem all the more miraculous. Almost all of us have social flaws of some sort, ranging from the relatively harmless to those that can get us in trouble. Perhaps it could be that we talk too much, or are too honest in our criticisms of people, or take offense too easily when others do not respond positively to our ideas. If we repeat instances of such behavior often enough, we tend to offend people without ever really knowing why. The reason for this is twofold: first, we are quick to discern the mistakes and defects of others, but when it comes to ourselves we are generally too emotional and insecure to look squarely at our own. Second, people rarely tell us the truth about what it is that we do wrong. They are afraid to cause conflict or to be viewed as mean-spirited. And so it becomes very difficult for us to perceive our flaws, let alone correct them. We sometimes have the experience of doing work that we consider quite brilliant, and then are rather shocked when we receive feedback from others who do not see it the same way at all. In such moments we are made aware of the discrepancy between our emotional and subjective relationship to our own work, and the response of others who view it with complete detachment, capable of pointing out flaws we could never see. The same discrepancy, however, exists on the social level. People see our behavior from the outside, and their view of us is never what we imagine it to be. To have the power to see ourselves objectively would be of immense benefit to our social intelligence. We could begin to correct the flaws that offend, to see the role that we play in creating any kind of negative dynamic, and to have a more realistic assessment of who we are. To see ourselves objectively, we must follow the example of Temple Grandin. We can begin this process by looking at negative events in our past—people sabotaging our work, bosses firing us for no logical reason, nasty personal battles with colleagues. It is best to start with events that are at least several months old and thus not so emotionally charged. In dissecting these occurrences, we must focus on what we did that either triggered or worsened the dynamic. In looking at several such incidents, we might begin to see a pattern that indicates a particular flaw in our character. We must accept that we will never be able to change those parts of ourselves that are deeply ingrained and that are part of who we are as individuals. However, we can choose how we respond to situations and how we interact with others. By understanding the flaws within ourselves, we can learn to navigate our way through life with greater ease and grace. We must accept that we will never be able to change those parts of ourselves that are deeply ingrained and that are part of who we are as individuals. However, we can choose how we respond to situations and how we interact with others. By understanding the flaws within ourselves, we can learn to navigate our way through life with greater ease and grace.

Josef von Sternberg had risen from studio errand boy to become one of the most successful directors in Hollywood during the 1920s and '30s. He developed along the way a particular philosophy that would serve him well throughout his directorial career, which would last into the 1950s: all that mattered was the final product. His role was to get everyone on the same page and guide the production according to the vision he had, employing whatever means necessary to get the results he wanted. And the greatest impediment to realizing his vision came inevitably from the actors. They thought first and foremost of their careers. The film as a whole mattered less than the attention they received for their part. This would make them try to steal the limelight, and in the process they would alter the quality of the film. With such actors, von Sternberg would have to find a way to trick or beguile them into doing his bidding. In 1930, von Sternberg was invited to Berlin to direct what would be his most famous film, The Blue Angel, which would feature the world-renowned actor Emil Jannings. In looking for the female lead for the film, von Sternberg discovered a relatively unknown German actress named Marlene Dietrich, whom he would go on to direct in seven feature films, singlehandedly transforming her into a star. Von Sternberg had worked with Jannings before and knew that the actor was an impossibly foolish person. Jannings did everything he could to disrupt the flow of the production. He took as a personal affront any attempt by von Sternberg to rein him in or get him to focus on the task at hand. In order to maintain control over the production and ensure that his vision was realized, von Sternberg had to be cunning and manipulative. He would use every trick in the book to get Jannings to do what he wanted, even if it meant going against the actor's wishes or ignoring his demands. It was a delicate balancing act, but von Sternberg was a master of the art. He knew how to push buttons and manipulate people into doing what he wanted without them even realizing that they were being manipulated. And in the end, it paid off. The Blue Angel became one of the most iconic films of all time, and Marlene Dietrich's career took off in a way that none of us could have imagined.