The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts.
Repair it into clean, readable English.
Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
e	who	want	to	collaborate—they	are
often	trying	to	find	someone	who	will	do	the	heavier	lifting	for	them.
Flightiness:
	We	like	to	make	a	show	of	how	much	our	decisions	are	based
on	rational	considerations,	but	the	truth	is	that	we	are	largely	governed	by	our
emotions,	which	continually	color	our	perceptions.	What	this	means	is	that	the
people	around	you,	constantly	under	the	pull	of	their	emotions,	change	their
ideas	by	the	day	or	by	the	hour,	depending	on	their	mood.	You	must	never
assume	that	what	people	say	or	do	in	a	particular	moment	is	a	statement	of	their
permanent	desires.	Yesterday	they	were	in	love	with	your	idea;	today	they	seem
lukewarm.	This	will	confuse	you	and	if	you	are	not	careful,	you	will	waste
valuable	mental	space	trying	to	figure	out	their	real	feelings,	their	mood	of	the
moment,	their	fleeting	motivations.
It	is	best	to	cultivate	both	distance	and	a	degree	of	detachment	from	other
people’s	shifting	emotions	so	that	you	are	not	caught	up	in	the	process.	Focus	on
their	actions,	which	are	generally	more	consistent,	and	not	on	their	words.	Do
not	take	so	seriously	people’s	promises	or	their	ardor	in	wanting	to	help	you.	If
they	come	through,	so	much	the	better,	but	be	prepared	for	the	more	frequent
change	of	heart.	Rely	upon	yourself	to	get	things	done	and	you	will	not	be
disappointed.
Passive Aggression:
The	first	essential	strategy	in	dealing	with	people	is	to	understand	the	role	of
passive	aggression.	It	is	a	common	problem	that	tends	to	make	you	emotional	and
lock	you	into	the	Naïve	Perspective.	Such	problems	include	unexpected	political	battles,
superficial	judgments	of	your	character	based	on	appearances,	or	petty-minded	criticisms
of	your	work.	The	following	four	essential	strategies,	developed	by	Masters	past	and
present,	will	help	you	to	meet	these	inevitable	challenges	and	maintain	the	rational
mind-set	necessary	for	social	intelligence.