Fortunately, the text has been repaired and can be read as clean English:

The deeper he immersed himself into Pirah達 culture, the more it changed him. He not only grew disenchanted with the top-down form of research in linguistics and the ideas it led to, but also with his work as a missionary. These were both attempts to impose alien ideas and values on the Pirah達. He could only imagine that spreading the Gospel and converting them to Christianity would completely ruin their culture, which had shaped itself so perfectly to their circumstances and made them so content. With these ideas, he lost his faith in Christianity itself and finally left the church. Learning an alien culture from deeply inside it, he could no longer accept the superiority of one particular belief or value system. To hold such an opinion, he determined, is merely an illusion that comes from remaining on the outside.

For many researchers in circumstances similar to Daniel Everett's, the natural response is to rely on the skills and concepts they have learned for research purposes. This would mean studying the Pirah達 as closely as Everett had done in the beginning, taking extensive notes, and trying to make this alien culture fit into the framework already designated by the prevailing theories in linguistics and anthropology. Doing so, such researchers would be rewarded with articles in prestigious journals and solid positions within academia. But in the end, they would remain on the outside looking in, and a good portion of their conclusions would simply be confirmations of what they had already assumed. The wealth of information that Everett had uncovered about their language and culture would remain unnoticed. Imagine how often this has occurred in the past and still occurs in the present, and how many secrets of indigenous cultures have been lost to us because of this outsider approach.

Part of this predilection for the outside perspective originates from a prejudice among scientists. Studying from the outside, many would say, preserves our objectivity. But what kind of objectivity is it when the researcher's perspective is tainted by so many assumptions and predigested theories? The reality of the Pirah達 could only be seen from within and from participating in their culture. This does not taint the observer with subjectivity. A scientist can participate from within and yet retain his or her reasoning powers. Everett could stand back from their culture and devise his IEP theory. The intuitive and the rational, the inside perspective and science, can easily coexist. For Everette, choosing this inside path required a great deal of courage. It meant physically subjecting himself to the dangers of their life in the jungle. It led to a difficult confrontation with other linguists and even his own ideas about language acquisition.

In a broader context, the synthesis of all forms of knowledge, like Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's vision of "The Universal Man/Woman," emphasizes the interconnectedness and diversity of human experience. Goethe grew up in an unhappy home in Frankfurt, Germany, where he received a fine education but struggled with his father's emotional distance. He studied art, science, languages, various crafts, fencing, and dancing. But when he left home to study at the University of Leipzig, he felt as if he had been set free from prison. His ideas went against the grain, ranting against Christianity and yearning for the pagan religion of the ancient Greeks. He fell in love and experienced deep emotional swings, which culminated in a lung hemorrhage that left him near death. As he recovered, he was struck by two ideas that would remain with him for the rest of his life. First, he felt he possessed a type of inner spirit that he named his daemon, an incarnation of all his intense, restless, demonic energy. This energy could turn destructive or be mastered and channeled into something productive. Second, he decided this daemon was a spirit implanted in him at birth and encompassed his whole being. How he managed it made the difference between success and failure in his life.