Goethe had experienced a near-death experience when he was young. This made him feel the presence of death in his bones, which stayed with him for weeks after recovering. As he returned to life, he was suddenly struck by the strangeness of being alive, possessing a heart and lungs that functioned beyond his conscious control. He felt there was a life force that transcended individual incarnations of life, not from God, but from nature itself. In his convalescence, he would take long walks in the countryside and transfer his personal sense of the strangeness of life to the sight of plants, trees, and animals. What force brought them to their present, perfectly adapted states of life? What was the source of the energy that made them grow?

Feeling as if he had been reprieved from a death sentence, Goethe experienced an insatiable curiosity for this life force. An idea came to him for a story based on the famous German legend of a scholar named Faust, who desperately wants to discover the secret of life and meets an incarnation of the devil named Mephistopheles, who helps him in his quest in exchange for possession of his soul. If ever the restless Faust experiences a moment of contentment and wants nothing more from life, then he is to die, and the devil will own his soul. Goethe began to take notes on this drama, and in the dialogues he wrote between the devil and Faust, he could hear his own inner voices, his own demonic dualities talking to each other.

Several years later, Goethe became a lawyer in Frankfurt. His daemon seemed to take control of him, as it had done before in Leipzig. He hated the conventional life of a lawyer and all of the conventions that seemed to dominate social life and disconnect people from nature. He entertained deeply rebellious thoughts, which he channeled into an epistolary novel—The Sorrows of Young Werther. Although the story was loosely based on people he knew and a young friend who had committed suicide over a failed romance, most of the ideas in it came from his experiences. The novel promoted the superiority of emotions and advocated a return to a life of sensation and living closer to nature. It was the precursor of the movement that would come to be known throughout Europe as Romanticism and created a powerful reaction in Germany and beyond. Overnight, young Goethe became a celebrity.

In Weimar, Goethe was a changed man—a sober scientist and thinker. But in 1801, another bout of illness came close to killing him yet again. It took years to recover, but by 1805 he felt his strength returning, and with it a return to sensations he had not experienced since his youth. That year initiated one of the strangest and most amazing periods of productivity in the history of the human mind, stretching from his mid-fifties to his late sixties. The daemon he had repressed for several decades broke loose once more, but now he had the discipline to channel it into all kinds of work. Poems, novels, and plays came pouring out of him. He took up Faust again, writing most of it in this period. His day was an almost insane medley of different studies—writing in the morning, experiments and scientific observations (which were now expanded to chemistry and meteorology) in the afternoon, discussions with friends about aesthetics, science, and politics in the evening. He seemed tireless, and to be going through a second youth.

Goethe had come to the conclusion that all forms of human knowledge are manifestations of the same life force he had intuited in his near-death experience as a young man. The problem with most people, he felt, is that they build artificial walls around subjects and ideas. The real thinkers, however, saw beyond these barriers and were able to uncover the underlying connections between them.