A man wants to be a writer but struggles to figure out what he should write about. As he grows up, he starts exploring the two social realms of Bohemia and landed aristocracy. He dissects various people he meets, uncovering the essence of their characters that lies underneath their superficial social personalities. He has several failed love affairs in which he suffers the extremes of jealousy. After numerous adventures and a creeping sense of failure as he advances in life, at the very end of the novel, he discovers what he wants to write - it will be the book that we have just been reading.

The novel would be called In Search of Lost Time, and in the end, it would recount much of Proust's own life, all of the various characters he knew disguised under different names. In the course of the narration, he would cover the entire history of France from the moment he was born to the present, whatever the present was. It would be a portrait of society as a whole; he would be the entomologist uncovering the laws that governed the behavior of all the inhabitants of the anthill. His only concern now was his health. The task ahead of him was immense. Would he live long enough to complete it?

Over the course of several years, he finished the first part of the book, known as Swann's Way. It was published in 1913, and the reviews were extremely positive. No one had ever read a novel quite like it. It seemed that Proust had created his own genre - part novel, part essay. But as he was making plans for the final half of the book, war broke out across Europe, and the publishing business essentially ground to a halt. Proust continued working on the novel unremittingly, but as he did so, something strange happened - the book kept expanding in size and scope, one volume after the next.

His method of working was partially responsible for this increase. He had collected thousands of bits of stories, characters, lessons on life, laws of psychology that he slowly pieced together in the novel, like tiles of a mosaic. He could not foresee the end. And as the book grew in size, it suddenly assumed a different form - real life and the novel became inextricably interwoven. When he needed a new character, a wealthy debutante for instance, he would hunt down her equivalent in society and get himself invited to balls and soirées where he could study her.

Going through volume after volume, readers would have the sensation that they were actually living and experiencing this world from within, the narrator's thoughts becoming one's own thoughts - the boundaries between narrator and reader disappearing. It was a magical effect; it felt like life itself. Straining to finish the final volume, the point at which the narrator would be finally able to write the novel we have been reading, Proust was in a hurry. He could feel his energy waning and death approaching. All through the publishing process, he would make the publishers stop the printing, as some new incident he had personally witnessed had to be included in the book. Now, sensing himself near death, he made his female attendant take some final notes.

He finally understood how it felt to be dying, and he had to rewrite a previous deathbed scene - it was not psychologically real enough. He died two days later, never to see the full seven volumes in print.

Keys to Mastery
Cook Ting was cutting up an ox for Lord Wen-hui. "Ah, this is marvelous!" said Lord Wen-hui. "Imagine skill reaching such heights!" Cook Ting laid down his knife and replied, "What I care about is the Way, which goes beyond skill. When I first began cutting up oxen, all I could see was the ox itself. After three years, I no longer saw the whole ox. And now - now I go at it by spirit and don't look with my eyes. Perception and understanding have come to a stop and spirit moves where it wants."

Throughout history, we read of Masters in every conceivable form of human endeavor describing a sensation of suddenly possessing heightened intellectual powers after years of immersion in their field. The great chess Master Bobby Fischer spoke of being able to think beyond the various moves of his pieces on the chessboard; after a while, he could see "fields of forces" that allowed him to anticipate the entire direction of the match. For the pianist Glenn Gould, he no longer had to focus on notes or parts of the music he was playing but instead saw the entire architecture of the piece and could express it. Albert Einstein suddenly was able to realize not just the answer to a problem but a whole new way of looking at the universe, contained in a visual image he intuited. The inventor Thomas Edison spoke of a vision he had for illuminating an entire city with electric light, this complex system communicated to him through a single image.

In all of these instances, these practitioners of various skills described a sensation of seeing more. They were suddenly able to grasp an entire situation through an idea or a combination of ideas.