DEDICATION
For my mother and father who showed me unconditional love and taught me the values of hard work and integrity
CONTENTS
Dedication
CHAPTER 1 | THE NEW RULES
How to Become the Smartest Person in Any Room
CHAPTER 2 | BE A MIRROR
How to Quickly Establish Rapport
CHAPTER 3 | DON’T FEEL THEIR PAIN, LABEL IT
How to Create Trust with Tactical Empathy
CHAPTER 4 | BEWARE "YES" - MASTER "NO"
How to Generate Momentum and Make It Safe to Reveal the Real Stakes
CHAPTER 5 | TRIGGER THE TWO WORDS THAT IMMEDIATELY TRANSFORM ANY NEGOTIATION
How to Gain the Permission to Persuade
CHAPTER 6 | BEND THEIR REALITY
How to Shape What Is Fair
CHAPTER 7 | CREATE THE ILLUSION OF CONTROL
How to Calibrate Questions to Transform Conflict into Collaboration
CHAPTER 8 | GUARANTEE EXECUTION
How to Spot the Liars and Ensure Follow-Through from Everyone Else
CHAPTER 9 | BARGAIN HARD
How to Get Your Price
CHAPTER 10 | FIND THE BLACK SWAN
How to Create Breakthroughs by Revealing the Unknown Unknowns
Acknowledgments
Appendix: Prepare a Negotiation One Sheet
Notes
Index
About the Authors
Credits
Copyright

I was an iterative process, not an intellectual one, as we refined the tools we used day after day. And it was urgent. Our tools had to work, because if they didn't, someone died. But why did they work? That was the question that drew me to Harvard, to that office with Mnookin and Blum. I lacked confidence outside my narrow world. Most of all, I needed to articulate my knowledge and learn how to combine it with theirs-and they clearly had some-so I could understand, systematize, and expand it.

Yes, our techniques clearly worked with mercenaries, drug dealers, terrorists, and brutal killers. But what about with normal humans? As I'd soon discover in the storied halls of Harvard, our techniques made great sense intellectually, and they worked everywhere.

It turned out that our approach to negotiation held the keys to unlock profitable human interactions in every domain and every interaction and every relationship in life. This book is how it works.

To answer my questions, a year later, in 2006, I talked my way into Harvard Law School's Winter Negotiation Course. The best and brightest compete to get into this class, and it was filled with brilliant Harvard students getting law and business degrees and hotshot students from other top Boston universities like the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Tufts. The Olympic trials for negotiating. And I was the only outsider.

The first day of the course, all 144 of us piled into a lecture hall for an introduction and then we split into four groups, each led by a negotiation instructor. After we'd had a chat with our instructor-mine was named Sheila Heen, and she's a good buddy to this day-we were partnered off in pairs and sent into mock negotiations. Simple: one of us was selling a product, the other was the buyer, and each had clear limits on the price they could take.

My counterpart was a languid redhead named Andy (a pseudonym), one of those guys who wear their intellectual superiority like they wear their khakis: with relaxed confidence. He and I went into an empty classroom overlooking one of those English-style squares on Harvard's campus, and we each used the tools we had. Andy would throw out an offer and give a rationally air-tight explanation for why it was a good one-an inescapable logic trap-and I'd answer with some variation of "How am I supposed to do that?"

We did this a bunch of times until we got to a final figure. When we left, I was happy. I thought I'd done pretty well for a dumb guy.

After we all regrouped in the classroom, Sheila went around the students and asked what price each group had agreed on, and then wrote the result on the board. Finally, it was my turn.

"Chris, how did you do with Andy?" she asked. "How much did you get?"

I'll never forget Sheila's expression when I told her what Andy had agreed to pay. Her whole face first went red, as if she couldn't breathe, and then out popped a little strangled gasp like a baby bird's hungry cry. Finally, she started to laugh. And Andy squirmed.

"You got literally every dime he had," she said, "and in his brief he was supposed to hold a quarter of it back in reserve for future work."

Andy sank deep in his chair.

The next day the same thing happened with another partner. I mean, I absolutely destroyed the guy's budget.

It didn't have anything to do with my intellect or any sort of mathematical logic. The questions I kept asking sounded like they were implying that the other side was being dishonest and unfair. And that was enough to make them falter and negotiate with themselves. Answering my calibrated questions demanded deep emotional strengths and tactical psychological insights that the toolbox they'd been given did not contain.

I shrugged.

"I'm just asking questions," I said. "It's a passive-aggressive approach. I just ask the same three or four open-ended questions over and over and over and over. They get worn out answering and give me everything I want."

Andy jumped in his seat as if he'd been stung by a bee.

"Damn!" he said. "That's what happened. I had no idea."

By the time I'd finished my winter course at Harvard, I'd actually become friends with some of my fellow students. Even with Andy.

If my time at Harvard showed me anything, it was that we at the FBI had a lot to teach the world about negotiating. In my short stay I realized that without a deep understanding of human psychology, without the acceptance that we are all crazy, irrational, impulsive, emotionally driven animals, all the raw intelligence and mathematical logic in the world is little help in the fraught, shifting interplay of two people negotiating.

Yes, perhaps we are the only animal that haggles-a monkey does not exchange a portion of his banana for another's nuts-but no matter how we dress up our negotiations in mathematical theories, we are always an animal, always acting and reacting first and foremost from our deeply held but mostly invisible and inchoate fears, needs, perceptions, and desires.

That's not how these folks at Harvard learned it, though. Their theories and techniques all had to do with intellectual power, logic, authoritative acronyms like BATNA and ZOPA, rational notions of value, and a moral concept of what was fair and what was not. And built on top of this false edifice of rationality was, of course, process. They had a script to follow, a predetermined sequence of actions, offers, and counteroffers designed in a specific order to bring about a particular outcome.

It was as if they were dealing with a robot, that if you did a b c d, you would get x. But in the real world negotiation is far too unpredictable and complex for that. You may have to do a c d and then maybe a q.

The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts. Repair it into clean, readable English. Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
	best	price.
OLD-SCHOOL	NEGOTIATION
Hostage	 taking—and	 therefore	 hostage	 negotiating—has
existed	since	the	dawn	of	recorded	time.	The	Old	Testament
spins	 plenty	 of	 tales	 of	 Israelites	 and	 their	 enemies	 taking
each	other’s	citizens	hostage	as	spoils	of	war.	The	Romans,
for	 their	 part,	 used	 to	 force	 the	 princes	 of	 vassal	 states	 to
send	 their	 sons	 to	 Rome	 for	 their	 education,	 to	 ensure	 the
continued	loyalty	of	the	princes.
But	 until	 the	 Nixon	 administration,	 hostage	 negotiating
as	 a	 process	 was	 limited	 to	 sending	 in	 troops	 and	 trying	 to
shoot	 the	 hostages	 free.	 In	 law	 enforcement,	 our	 approach
was	 pretty	 much	 to	 talk	 until	 we	 figured	 out	 how	 to	 take
them	out	with	a	gun.	Brute	force.
Then	a	series	of	hostage	disasters	forced	us	to	change.
In	1971,	thirty-nine	hostages	were	killed	when	the	police
tried	 to	 resolve	 the	Attica	 prison	 riots	 in	 upstate	 New	York
with	 guns.	 Then	 at	 the	 1972	 Olympics	 in	 Munich,	 eleven
Israeli	 athletes	 and	 coaches	 were	 killed	 by	 their	 Palestinian
captors	after	a	botched	rescue	attempt	by	the	German	police.
But	 the	 greatest	 inspiration	 for	 institutional	 change	 in
American	law	 enforcement	 came	 on	 an	 airport	 tarmac	 in
Jacksonville,	Florida,	on	October	4,	1971.
The	 United	 States	 was	 experiencing	 an	 epidemic	 of
airline	 hijackings	 at	 the	 time;	 there	 were	 five	 in	 one	 three-
day	 period	 in	 1970.	 It	 was	 in	 that	 charged	 atmosphere	 that:%.*an	 unhinged	 man	 named	 George	 Giffe	 Jr.	 hijacked	 a
chartered	 plane	 out	 of	 Nashville,	 Tennessee,	 planning	 to
head	to	the	Bahamas.
By	 the	 time	 the	 incident	 was	 over,	 Giffe	 had	 murdered
two	 hostages—his	 estranged	 wife	 and	 the	 pilot—and	 killed
himself	to	boot.
But	 this	 time	 the	 blame	 didn’t	 fall	 on	 the	 hijacker;
instead,	 it	 fell	 squarely	 on	 the	 FBI.	 Two	 hostages	 had
managed	 to	 convince	 Giffe	 to	 let	 them	 go	 on	 the	 tarmac	 in
Jacksonville,	where	they’d	stopped	to	
refuel.	But	the	agents
had	gotten	impatient	and	shot	out	the	engine.	And	that	had
pushed	Giffe	to	the	nuclear	option.
In	 fact,	 the	 blame	 placed	 on	 the	 FBI	 was	 so	 strong	 that
when	the	pilot’s	wife	and	Giffe’s	daughter	filed	a	wrongful
death	suit	alleging	FBI	negligence,	the	courts	agreed.
This	incident	marked	a	turning	point	in	how	law	enforcement	and	hostage
negotiators	approached	their	jobs.	 The	traditional	approach	was	to	use	brute
force,	but	this	had	been	proven	ineffective.	 Instead,	a	new	approach	called
crisis	negotiation	began	to	gain	popularity.	 This	method	relied	on	talking	the
hijacker	down	and	persuading	him	to	surrender.
One	of	the	pioneers	in	this	new	field	was	former	FBI	hostage
negotiator	George	Fouche	Jr.	He	established	the	Crisis	Negotiation	Institute	and	wrote	a	book	on	the	subject,	"Prescription	for	Hostage	Rescue."
The	concept	of	crisis	negotiation	was	simple:	 hostage	takers	were	not	always	after
money.	 Often,	they	were	seeking	attention,	revenge,	or	justice.	 By	meeting	these	needs,	hostage
negotiators	could	prevent	violence	and	resolve	crises	peacefully.
This	new	approach	worked	wonders.	 Between	1970	and	1980,	only	one	U.S.	hostage	died	in	a	situation	where	these	negotiation	techniques	were	used.
Today,	crisis	negotiators	are	trained	to	understand	human	nature	and	how	it	can	be	exploited	in	a	situation.	 They	learn	to	empathize	with	their	subjects,	finding	common	ground	and	building	rapport.
The	success	of	crisis	negotiation	led	to	its	application	in	other	areas	such	as	business,	politics,	and	personal	relationships.	 It	has	become	a	valuable	tool	for	mediating	conflict	and	building	stronger	bonds.
The	crisis	negotiation	approach	can	be	summed	up	in	three	simple	steps:
1)	Understand	the	needs	of	the	other	party.
2)	Build	rapport	and	trust.
3)	Reach	a	resolution	that	meets	both	parties'	needs.
This	method	has	been	proven	time	and	again	to	be	effective	in	dealing	with	crisis	situations.	 It	has	become	a	core	principle	of	conflict	resolution	and	mediation.

in	our	personal	lives	are	actually	a	series	of	 negotiations,
where	we	try	to	convince	others	of	our	ideas,	 get	them	to	do	what	we	want,	and	manage	disputes.
Just	like	in	hostage	negotiations,	we	deal	with	people	who	are	
emotionally	driven,	irrational,	or	oppositional.	And	just	like	the	hostage-taker,	
we’re	often	trying	to	get	something	from	other	people	that	they	don’t	
want	to	give	up.
In	other	words,	we’re	all	in	the	same	boat.	 We’re	all	
struggling	to	navigate	complex	emotional	environments,	and	we’re	all
trying	to	figure	out	what	it	takes	to	get	people	to	do	what	we	
want.
So	if	you	ever	find	yourself	in	a	situation	where	you’re	
struggling	to	connect	with	someone,	or	you’re	trying	to	convince	
them	of	your	point	of	view,	or	you’re	stuck	in	a	dispute	that’s
getting	nowhere,	know	this:	 You	are	not	alone.	 This	is	real-life
negotiation.	 And	if	you	know	how	to	harness	the	power	of	
emotional	intelligence,	you	can	increase	your	chances	of	success.
So	let’s	start	with	the	basics:	 If	you	want	to	get	other	people	
to	listen	to	what	you	have	to	say,	 you	need	to	demonstrate	
empathy.
And	it	all	begins	with	listening.	 By	listening	intensely,	 a
negotiator	demonstrates	 empathy	and	shows	a	sincere	desire	to	better	
understand	what	the	other	side	is	experiencing.
Psychotherapy	research	shows	that	when	individuals	feel
listened	 to,	 they	tend	to	listen	to	themselves	more	carefully
and	to	openly	evaluate	 and	clarify	their	own	thoughts	and
feelings.	In	addition,	they	tend	to	become	less	defensive	and
oppositional	 and	more	willing	to	listen	to	other	points	of	view,
which	gets	them	to	the	calm	and	logical	place	where	they	can	be
good	Getting	to	Yes	problem	solvers.
The	whole	concept,	which	you’ll	learn	as	the	centerpiece
of	this	book,	is	called	
Tactical	Empathy
.	This	is	listening	as
a	 martial	 art,	 balancing	 the	 subtle	behaviors	of	emotional
intelligence	and	the	assertive	skills	of	influence,	to	gain
access	to	the	mind	of	another	person.	 Contrary	 to	popular
opinion,	listening	is	not	a	passive	activity.	 It	is	the	most
active	thing	you	can	do.

At home are negotiations that boil down to the expression of a simple, animalistic urge: I want. "I want you to free the hostages," is a very relevant one to this book, of course. But so is: "I want you to accept that $1 million contract." "I want to pay $20,000 for that car." "I want you to give me a 10 percent raise." and "I want you to go to sleep at 9 p.m." Negotiation serves two distinct, vital life functions—information gathering and behavior influencing—and includes almost any interaction where each party wants something from the other side. Your career, your finances, your reputation, your love life, even the fate of your kids—at some point all of these hinge on your ability to negotiate. Negotiation as you'll learn it here is nothing more than communication with results. Getting what you want out of life is all about getting what you want from—and with—other people. Conflict between two parties is inevitable in all relationships. So, it's useful—crucial, even—to know how to engage in that conflict to get what you want without inflicting damage. In this book, I draw on my more than two-decade career in the Federal Bureau of Investigation to distill the principles and practices I deployed in the field into an exciting new approach designed to help you disarm, redirect, and dismantle your counterpart in virtually any negotiation. And to do so in a relationship-affirming way. Yes, you'll learn how we negotiated the safe release of countless hostages. But you'll also learn how to use a deep understanding of human psychology to negotiate a lower car price, a bigger raise, and a child's bedtime. This book will teach you to reclaim control of the conversations that inform your life and career. The first step to achieving a mastery of daily negotiation is to get over your aversion to negotiating. You don't need to like it; you just need to understand that's how the world works. Negotiating does not mean browbeating or grinding someone down. It simply means playing the emotional game that human society is set up for. In this world, you get what you ask for; you just have to ask correctly. So claim your prerogative to ask for what you think is right. What this book is really about, then, is getting you to accept negotiation and in doing so learn how to get what you want in a psychologically aware way. You'll learn to use your emotions, instincts, and insights in any encounter to connect better with others, influence them, and achieve more. Effective negotiation is applied people smarts, a psychological edge in every domain of life: how to size someone up, how to influence their sizing up of you, and how to use that knowledge to get what you want. But beware: this is not another pop-psych book. It's a deep and thoughtful (and most of all, practical) take on leading psychological theory that distills lessons from a twenty-four-year career in the FBI and ten years teaching and consulting in the best business schools and corporations in the world. And it works for one simple reason: it was designed in—and for—the real world. It was not born in a classroom or a training hall, but built from years of experience that improved it until it reached near perfection. Remember, a hostage negotiator plays a unique role: he has to win. Can he say to a bank robber, "Okay, you've taken four hostages. Let's split the difference—give me two, and we'll call it a day?" No. A successful hostage negotiator has to get everything he asks for, without giving anything back of substance, and do so in a way that leaves the adversaries feeling as if they have a great relationship. His work is emotional intelligence on steroids. Those are the tools you'll learn here. The Book Like a contractor building a house, this book is constructed from the ground up: first comes the big slabs of foundation, then the necessary load-bearing walls, the elegant but impermeable roof, and the lovely focus on what the other party has to say. Chapter 2 will delve into Tactical Empathy. You'll learn how to recognize your counterpart's perspective and then gain trust and understanding through Labeling—that is, by repeating that perspective back to them. You'll also learn how to defuse negative dynamics by bringing them into the open. Finally, I'll explain how to disarm your counterpart's complaints about you by speaking them aloud in an Accusation Audit. Next, in Chapter 3, I'll examine ways to make your counterpart feel understood and positively affirmed in a negotiation in order to create an atmosphere of unconditional positive regard. Here, you'll learn why you should strive for "That's right" instead of "Yes" at every stage of a negotiation, and how to identify, rearticulate, and emotionally affirm your counterpart's worldview with Summaries and Paraphrasing. Chapter 4 teaches the flip side of Getting to Yes. You'll learn why it's vitally important to get to "No" because "No" starts the negotiation. You'll also discover how to step out of your ego and negotiate in your counterpart's world, the only way to achieve an agreement they will implement. Finally, you'll see how to engage your counterpart by acknowledging their right to choose, and you'll learn an email technique that ensures that you'll never be ignored again. In Chapter 5, I demonstrate how to employ these Calibrated Questions to guard against failures in the implementation phase. "Yes," as I always say, is nothing without "How?" You'll also discover the importance of nonverbal communication; how to use "How" questions to gently say "No"; how to get your counterparts to bid against themselves; and how to influence the deal killers when they're not at the table. At a certain point, every negotiation gets down to the brass tacks: that is, to old-school haggling. Chapter 6 offers a step-by-step process for effective bargaining, from how to prepare to how to dodge deadlines and create urgency; employ the idea of fairness to nudge your counterpart; and anchor their emotions so that not accepting your offer feels like a loss. After this, Chapter 7 is dedicated to that incredibly powerful tool I used at Harvard: Calibrated Questions, the queries that begin with "How?" or "What?" By eliminating "Yes" and "No" answers they force your counterpart to apply their mental energy to solving your problems. In Chapter 8, I demonstrate how to employ these Calibrated Questions to influence the deal killers when they're not at the table.

In every negotiation there are between three and five pieces of information that, were they to be uncovered, would change everything. The concept is an absolute game-changer; so much so, I've named my company The Black Swan Group. In this chapter, you'll learn how to recognize the markers that show the hidden nest, as well as simple tools for employing Black Swans to gain leverage over your counterpart and achieve truly amazing deals.

Each chapter will start with a fast-paced story of a hostage negotiation, which will then be dissected with an eyeto explaining what worked and what didn't. After I explain the theory and the tools, you'll read real-life case studies from me and others who've used these tools to prevail while negotiating a salary, purchasing a car, or working out nettlesome problems at home.

When you finish this book, I will have succeeded if you've applied these crucial techniques to improve your career and life. I'm sure you will. Just remember, to successfully negotiate it is critical to prepare. Which is why in the Appendix you'll find an invaluable tool I use with all my students and clients called the Negotiation One Sheet: a concise primer of nearly all our tactics and strategies for you to think through and customize for whatever kind of deal you're looking to close.

Most important to me is that you understand how urgent, essential, and even beautiful negotiation can be. When we embrace negotiating's transformative possibilities, we learn how to get what we want and how to move others to a better place. Negotiation is the heart of collaboration. It is what makes conflict potentially meaningful and productive for all parties. It can change your life, as it has changed mine.

I've always thought of myself as just a regular guy. Hardworking and willing to learn, yes, but not particularly talented. And I've always felt that life holds amazing possibilities. In my much younger days, I just didn't know how to unlock those possibilities.

But with the skills I've learned, I've found myself doing extraordinary things and watching the people I've taught achieve truly life-changing results. When I use what I've learned over the last thirty years, I know I actually have the power to change the course of where my life is going, and to help others do that as well. Thirty years ago, while I felt like that could be done, I didn't know how.

Now I do. Here's how.

ed to the influence of the other four bank robbers, I hadn’t yet learned to be aware of a counterpart's overuse of personal pronouns—we/they o r me/I. The less important he makes himself, the more important he probably is (and vice versa). We would later find out there was only one other bank robber, and he had been tricked into the robbery. Actually, three robbers, if you counted the getaway driver who got away before we even entered the scene. The “lead” hostage-taker was running his own counterintelligence operation, feeding us all kinds of misinformation. He wanted us to think he had a bunch of co-conspirators with him—from a number of different countries. He also wanted us to think that his partners were much more volatile and dangerous than he was. Looking back, of course, his game plan was clear—he wanted to confuse us as much as he could until he could figure a way out. He would constantly tell us that he wasn’t in charge and that every decision was the responsibility of the other guys. He would indicate that he was scared—or, at least, a little tentative—when we asked him to pass along certain information. And yet he always spoke with a voice of complete calm and absolute confidence. It was a reminder to my colleagues and me that until you know what you’re dealing with, you don’t know what you’re dealing with. Though the call had come in about 8:30 a.m., by the time we arrived across the street from the bank and made contact it was probably about 10:30 a.m. The word when we came on the scene was that this was going to be cookie-cutter, by the book, short and sweet. Our commanders thought we’d be in and out of there in ten minutes because the bad guys supposedly wanted to give themselves up. This would later become a problem, when negotiations stalled and Command became embarrassed, because they’d made the mistake of sharing this early optimism with the press, based on all the early misinformation. We arrived on the scene to take a surrender, but the situation went sideways almost immediately. Everything we assumed we knew was wrong. CALM THE SCHIZOPHRENIC Our Negotiation Operation Center (NOC) was set up in an office in a bank immediately across a narrow street from the Chase branch. We were way too close to the hostage site, so right away we were at a disadvantage. We were less than thirty yards from the crisis point, where ideally you want to have a little more of a buffer than that. You want to put some distance between you and whatever worst-case scenario might be waiting at the other end of the deal. When my partner and I arrived, I was immediately assigned to coach the police department negotiator on the phone. His name was Joe, and he was doing fine—but in these types of situations, nobody worked alone. We always worked in teams. The thinking behind this policy was that all these extra sets of ears would pick up extra information. In some standoffs, we had as many as five people on the line, analyzing the information as it came in, offering behind-the-scenes input and guidance to our man on the phone—and that’s how we were set up here. We had Joe taking the lead on the phone, and another three or four of us were listening in, passing notes back and forth, trying to make sense of a confusing situation. One of us was trying to gauge the mood of the bad guy taking the lead on the other end, and another was listening in for clues or “tells” that might give us a better read on what we were facing, and so on. Students of mine balk at this notion, asking, “Seriously, do you really need a whole team to . . . hear someone out?” The fact that the FBI has come to that conclusion should be a wake-up call. Instead of prioritizing your argument—in fact, instead of doing any thinking at all in the early goings about what you’re going to say—make your sole and all-encompassing focus the other person and what they have to say. In that mode of true active listening—aided by the tactics you’ll learn in the following chapters—you’ll disarm them. You’ll make them feel safe. The goal is to identify what your counterparts actually need (monetarily, emotionally, or otherwise) and get them feeling safe enough to talk and talk and talk about what they want.

It was difficult to navigate through the ATM heist, and we learned that this guy's co-conspirators were also hostages, in a way. They were caught up in a bad situation they didn't see coming. It was this "disconnect" among the hostage-takers that helped us drive a wedge between them and put an end to the stalemate.

The leader wanted to make us think he and his partners were taking good care of his hostages, but in reality, the security guard was out of the picture, and the second bank teller had run to the bank basement to hide. Whenever Joe said he wanted to talk to the hostages, the hostage-taker would stall and make it seem like there was this frenzy of activity going on inside the bank, going to ridiculous lengths to tell us how much time and energy he and his cohorts were spending on taking good care of the hostages. Very often, the leader would use this as a reason to put Joe on hold or end a call.

Joe was doing a good job keeping this guy talking but was slightly limited by the negotiating approach that police departments were using at the time. The approach was half MSU - Making Shit Up - and half a sort of sales approach, basically trying to persuade, coerce or manipulate in any way possible. The problem was, we were in too much of a hurry, driving too hard toward a quick solution; trying to be a problem solver instead of a people mover.

Going too fast is one of the mistakes all negotiators are prone to making. If we're too much in a hurry, people can feel as if they're not being heard, and we risk undermining the rapport and trust we've built. There's plenty of research that now validates the passage of time as one of the most important tools for a negotiator. When you slow the process down, you also calm it down. After all, if someone is talking, they're not shooting.

We caught a break when the robbers started making noise about food. Joe was going back and forth with them on what they were going to have and how we were going to get it to them. It became a negotiation in itself. We got it all set up, prepared to send the food in on a kind of robot device, because that's what this guy was comfortable with, but then he did an about-face, said to forget about it. Said they'd found some food inside, so it was just one brick wall after another, one smoke screen after another. It would feel to us like we were making a little progress, then this guy would take an abrupt turn or hang up on us, or change his mind.

Meanwhile, our investigators used the time to run the registration of every one of the dozens of vehicles found nearby on the street, and managed to speak to the owners of every one of them except one - a car belonging to someone named Chris Watts. This became our only lead at the time, and as our endless back-and-forth continued on the phone, we sent a group of investigators to the address on Chris Watts' registration, where they found someone who knew Chris Watts and agreed to come down to the scene of the standoff to possibly identify him.

We still didn't have a visual on the inside, so our eyewitness had to be more of an "earwitness" - and he was able to identify Chris Watts by his voice. We now knew more about our adversary than he thought we did. The NYPD lieutenant came up with a shrewd move to shake things up, replacing Joe on the phone against standard protocol, but it easily could have backfired.

This soothing voice was the key to easing the confrontation. When deliberating on a negotiating strategy or approach, people tend to focus all their energies on what to say or do, but it's how we are (our general demeanor and delivery) that is both the easiest thing to enact and the most immediately effective mode of influence. Our brains don't just process and understand the actions and words of others but their feelings and intentions too, the social meaning of their behavior and their emotions.

The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts.
Repair it into clean, readable English.
Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
girlfriend, one of our instructors at The Black Swan Group was befuddled—not to mention a little embarrassed—that his partner was repeatedly getting better deals in their backstreet haggling sessions at the spice markets in Istanbul. For the merchants in such markets throughout the Middle East, bargaining is an art form. Their emotional intelligence is finely honed, and they'll use hospitality and friendliness in a powerful way to draw you in and create reciprocity that ends in an exchange of money. But it works both ways, as our instructor discovered while observing his girlfriend in action: she approached each encounter as a fun game, so that no matter how aggressively she pushed, her smile and playful demeanor primed her merchant friends to settle on a successful outcome. When people are in a positive frame of mind, they think more quickly, and are more likely to collaborate and problem-solve (instead of fight and resist). It applies to the smile-er as much as to the smile-ee: a smile on your face and in your voice will increase your own mental agility. Playful wasn't the move with Chris Watts. The way the late-night FM DJ voice works is that, when you inflect your voice in a downward way, you put it out there that you've got it covered. Talking slowly and clearly, you convey one idea: I'm in control. When you inflect in an upward way, you invite a response. Why? Because you've brought in a measure of uncertainty. You've made a statement sound like a question. You've left the door open for the other guy to take the lead, so I was careful here to be quiet, self-assured. It's the same voice I might use in a contract negotiation, when an item isn't up for discussion. If I see a work-for-hire clause, for example, I might say, "We don't do work-for-hire." Just like that, plain, simple, and friendly. I don't offer up an alternative, because it would beg further discussion, so I just make a straightforward declaration. That's how I played it here. I said, "Joe's gone. You're talking to me now." Done deal. You can be very direct and to the point as long as you create safety by a tone of voice that says I'm okay, you're okay, let's figure things out. The tide was turning. Chris Watts was rattled, but he had a few moves left in him. One of the bad guys went down to the basement and collected one of the female bank tellers. She'd disappeared into the bowels of the bank at some point, but Chris Watts and his accomplice hadn't chased after her because they knew she wasn't going anywhere. Now one of the bank robbers dragged her back up stairs and put her on the phone. "I'm okay." That's all. I said, "Who is this?" She said, "I'm okay." I wanted to keep her talking, so I asked her name—but then, just like that, she was gone. This was a brilliant move on Chris Watts' part. It was a threat, teasing us with the woman's voice but ultimately leaving us in the dark about his true intentions. Mirroring is most often associated with forms of nonverbal communication, especially body language, as negotiators a "mirror" focuses on the words and nothing else. Not the body language. Not the accent. Not the tone or delivery. Just the words. By repeating back what people say, you trigger this mirroring instinct and your counterpart will inevitably elaborate on what was just said and sustain the process of connecting. Psychologist Richard Wiseman created a study using waiters to identify what was the more effective method of creating a connection with strangers: mirroring or positive reinforcement. One group of waiters, using positive reinforcement, lavished praise and encouragement on patrons using words such as "great," "no problem," and "sure" in response to each order. The other group of waiters mirrored their customers simply by repeating their orders back to them. The results were stunning: the average tip of the waiters who mirrored was 70 percent more than of those who used positive reinforcement.

"Given Chris Watts a way to dodge this confrontation, but he was nevertheless rattled. Up until this moment, he’d thought he was anonymous. Whatever fantasy he had running through his head, there was a way out for him, a do-over button. Now he knew different. I composed myself, slowed it down a little, and this time shut my mouth after the mirror—I said, “No? You said ‘okay.’”
Now I had him, I thought. His voice went way up. He ended up blurting a few things out, vomiting more information, and became so flustered he stopped talking to me. Suddenly his accomplice, who we later learned was Bobby Goodwin, came onto the phone. We hadn’t heard from this second hostage-taker until now. We'd known all along that Chris Watts wasn't acting alone, but we hadn't gotten a good read on how many people he had working with him on this, and now here was his unwitting accomplice, thinking our original police department negotiator was still handling our end. We knew this because he kept calling me “Joe,” which told us he’d been in the loop early on, and somewhat less involved as the stalemate dragged on.
At the very least, the disconnect told me these guys weren't exactly on the same page—but I didn't jump to correct him.
Another thing: it sounded like this second guy was speaking through a towel, or a sweatshirt—like he was biting on some kind of fabric, even. Going to all these lengths to mask his voice, which meant he was clearly scared. He was nervous, jumpy as hell, anxious over how this standoff was going down.
I tried to set him at ease—still with the downward-inflecting DJ voice. I said, “Nobody's going anywhere.” I said, “Nobody’s gonna get hurt.”
After about a minute and a half, the jumpiness seemed to disappear. The muffled voice, too. His voice came through much more clearly as he said, “I trust you, Joe.”
The more I kept this second guy on the phone, the more it became clear he was someplace he did not want to be. Bobby wanted out—and, of course, he wanted out without getting hurt. He was already in deep, but he didn’t want it to get any deeper. He didn’t start out that day planning to rob a bank, but it took hearing my calm voice on the other end of the phone for him to start to see a way out. The seventh-largest standing army in the world was at the ready outside the bank doors—that's the size and scope of the NYPD, in full force, and their guns were fixed on him and his partner. Obviously, Bobby was desperate to step out those doors unharmed.
I didn’t know where Bobby was, inside the bank. To this day, I don’t know if he managed to step away from his partner, or if he was talking to me in plain sight of Chris Watts. I only know that I had his full attention, and that he was looking for a way to end the standoff—or, at least, to end his involvement in it. Our team scrambled to put a plan in place to bring this about. I started putting on bulletproof gear. We surveyed the scene, figuring I could position myself behind one of the big trucks we’d parked out in front of the bank, to give me a measure of cover, just in case.
Then we ran into one of those maddening situations where one hand didn't know what the other was doing. It turned out the bank door had been barricaded from the outside early on in the standoff—a precaution to ensure that none of the bank robbers could flee the scene. We all knew this, of course, but when the time came for Bobby to give himself up and walk out the door, it's like our brains went into sleep mode. No one on the SWAT team thought to remind anyone on the negotiating team of this one significant detail, so for a couple of long beats Bobby couldn’t get out, and I got a sick feeling in my stomach that whatever progress we’d just made with this guy would be for nothing.
So there we were, scrambling to recover. Soon, two SWAT guys moved forward toward the entrance, with ballistic shields, guns drawn, to take the locks and the barricade off the door—and at this point they still didn’t know what they were facing on the other side. It was a super-tense moment. There could have been a dozen guns on these two SWAT guys, but there was nothing for them to do but make their slow approach. Those guys were rock solid. They unlocked the door, backed away, and finally we were good to go."

The text contains a mix of different font encodings and glyph artifacts. Below is the corrected and cleaned English version:

"Just yet. All we knew was that we'd just gotten all this new intel, which told us we were closer to achieving our desired outcome than we had just thought. This was a positive development, something to celebrate. With what we now knew, it was going to be a whole lot easier to negotiate our way through the rest of it, and yet this commander was angry. He didn't like that he'd been played, so he turned to one of the guys from NYPD's Technical Assistance Response Unit (TARU) and commanded them to get a camera inside the bank, a mic...

Now that I was huddled with Bobby, the commander swapped me out in favor of another primary negotiator on the phone. The new negotiator played it the same way I had, a couple of hours earlier- said, "This is Dominick. You're talking to me now."

Dominick Misino was a great hostage negotiator- in my view, one of the world's great closers, which was the term often used for the guy brought in to bang out the last details and secure the deal. He didn't get rattled and he was good at what he did. Matter-of-fact. Street smart.

Dominick plowed ahead. And then, an amazing thing happened- a nearly disastrous amazing thing. As Chris Watts was talking to Dominick, he heard an electric tool of some kind burrowing its way through the wall behind him. It was one of our TARU guys, trying to get a bug planted inside- in precisely the wrong spot, at precisely the wrong time. Chris Watts was already rattled enough as it was, his partner giving himself up like that and leaving him to play out the siege on his own. And now, to hear our guys drilling through the wall, it just about set him off.

He responded like a pit bull backed into a corner. He called Dominick a liar. Dominick was unflappable. He kept his cool as Chris Watts raged on the other end of the phone, and eventually Dominick's cool, calm demeanor brought the guy from a boil to a simmer.

In retrospect, it was a fool move to try to get a bug inside the bank at this late stage- born out of frustration and panic. We'd gotten one of the hostage-takers out of the bank, but now we'd given back a measure of control. Startling the one remaining hostage-taker, who may or may not have been a loose cannon, was absolutely not a good idea. As Dominick went to work smoothing over the situation, Chris Watts switched things up on us. He said, "What if I let a hostage go?"

This came as if from nowhere. Dominick hadn't even thought to ask, but Chris Watts just offered up one of the tellers like it was no big deal- and to him, at this late stage in the standoff, I guess it wasn't. From his view, such a conciliatory move might buy him enough time to figure out a way to escape. Dominick remained calm, but seized on the opportunity. He said he wanted to talk to the hostage first, to make sure everything went okay.

It was a long, long day, but it went down in the books as a success. Nobody was hurt. The bad guys were in custody. And I emerged from the experience humbled by how much more there was to learn, but at the same time, awakened to and inspired by the elemental power of emotion, dialogue, and the FBI's evolving toolbox of applied psychological tactics to influence and persuade just about anyone in any situation.

In the decades since my initiation into the world of high-stakes negotiations, I've been struck again and again by how valuable these seemingly simple approaches can be. The ability to get inside the head- and eventually under the skin- of your counterpart depends on these techniques and a willingness to change your approach, based on new evidence, along the way. As I've worked with executives and students to develop these skills, I always try to reinforce the message that being right isn't the key to a successful negotiation- having the right mindset is."

not only the DJ voice, but to deliver the mirror in an inquisitive tone. The intention behind most mirrors should be "Please, help me understand." Every time you mirror someone, they will reword what they've said. They will never say it exactly the same way they said it the first time. Ask someone, "What do you mean by that?" and you're likely to incite irritation or defensiveness. A mirror, however, will get you the clarity you want while signaling respect and concern for what the other person is saying.

"Yes," her boss responded, "one for us and one for the customer."

"I'm sorry, so you are saying that the client is asking for a copy and we need a copy for internal use?"

"Actually, I'll check with the client—they haven't asked for anything. But I definitely want a copy. That's just how I do business."

"Absolutely," she responded. "Thanks for checking with the customer. Where would you like to store the in-house copy? There's no more space in the file room here."

"It's fine. You can store it anywhere," he said, slightly perturbed now.

"Anywhere?" she mirrored again, with calm concern.

When another person's tone of voice or body language is inconsistent with his words, a good mirror can be particularly useful. In this case, it caused her boss to take a nice, long pause—something he did not often do. My student sat silent. "As a matter of fact, you can put them in my office," he said, with more composure than he had had the whole conversation.

"I'll get the new assistant to print it for me after the project is done. For now, just create two digital backups."

A day later her boss emailed and wrote simply, "The two digital backups will be fine."

Not long after, I received an ecstatic email from this student: "I was shocked! I love mirrors! A week of work avoided!"

Mirroring will make you feel awkward as heck when you first try it. That's the only hard part about it; the technique takes a little practice. Once you get the hang of it, though, it'll become a conversational Swiss Army knife valuable in just about every professional and social setting.

The language of negotiation is primarily a language of conversation and rapport: a way of quickly establishing relationships and getting people to talk and think together. Which is why when you think of the greatest negotiators of all time, I've got a surprise for you—think Oprah Winfrey. Her daily television show was a case study of a master practitioner at work: on a stage face-to-face with someone she had never met, in front of a crowded studio of hundreds, with millions more watching from home, and a task to persuade that person in front of her, sometimes against his or her own best interests, to talk and talk and keep talking, ultimately sharing with the world deep, dark secrets that they had held hostage in their own minds for a lifetime. Look closely at such an interaction after reading this chapter and suddenly you'll see a refined set of powerful skills: a conscious smile to ease the tension, use of subtle verbal and nonverbal language to signal empathy (and thus security), a certain downward inflection in the voice, embrace of specific kinds of questions and avoidance of others—a whole array of previously hidden skills that will prove invaluable to you, once you've learned to use them.

The key lessons from this chapter to remember:
- A good negotiator prepares, going in to be ready for possible surprises; a great negotiator aims to use her skills to reveal the surprises she is certain to find.
- Don't commit to assumptions; instead, view them as hypotheses and use the negotiation to test them rigorously.
- People who view negotiation as a battle of arguments become overwhelmed by the voices in their head. Negotiation is not an act of battle; it's a process of discovery. The goal is to uncover as much information as possible.
- Mirrors work magic. Repeat the last three words (or the critical one to three words) of what someone has just said. We fear what's different and are drawn to what's similar. Mirroring is the art of insinuating similarity, which facilitates bonding. Use mirrors to encourage the other side to empathize and bond with you, keep people talking, buy your side time to regroup, and encourage your counterparts to reveal their strategy.
- CHAPTER 3 DON'T FEEL THEIR PAIN, LABEL IT I
it was 1998 and I was standing in a narrow hallway outside an apartment on the twenty-seventh floor of a high-rise in Harlem. I was the head of the New York City FBI Crisis Negotiation Team, and that day I was the primary negotiator.

The investigative squad had reported that at least three heavily armed fugitives were holed up inside. Several days earlier, the fugitives had used automatic weapons in a shoot-out with a rival gang, so the New York City FBI SWAT team was arrayed behind me, and our snipers were on nearby rooftops with rifles trained on the apartment windows.

In tense situations like this, the traditional negotiating advice is to keep a poker face. Don't get emotional. Until recently, most academics and researchers completely ignored the role of emotion in negotiation. Emotions were just an obstacle to a good outcome, they said. "Separate the people from the problem" was the common refrain.

But think about that: How can you separate people from the problem when their emotions are the problem? Especially when they are scared people with guns. Emotions are one of the main things that derail communication. Once people get upset at one another, rational thinking goes out the window.

That's why, instead of denying or ignoring emotions, good negotiators identify and influence them. They are able to precisely label emotions, those of others and especially their own. And once they label the emotions they talk about them without getting wound up. For them, emotion is a tool. Emotions aren't the obstacles, they are the means.

The relationship between an emotionally intelligent negotiator and their counterpart is essentially therapeutic. It duplicates that of a psychotherapist with a patient. The psychotherapist prods and pokes to understand his patient's problems, and the emotionally intelligent negotiator does the same thing. They probe and poke to gain insights into the other person's emotions and motivations. By doing this, they are able to build rapport, earn trust, and influence outcomes in a way that is not possible when you're dealing with a purely rational negotiation.

In our next chapter, we will explore how to use storytelling as part of your negotiating strategy.

When you turn the responses back onto the patient to get them to go deeper and change their behavior, that's exactly what good negotiators do. Getting to this level of emotional intelligence demands opening up your senses, talking less, and listening more. You can learn almost everything you need—and a lot more than other people would like you to know—simply by watching and listening, keeping your eyes peeled and your ears open, and your mouth shut. Think about the therapist's couch as you read the following sections. You'll see how a soothing voice, close listening, and a calm repetition of the words of your "patient" can get you a lot further than a cold, rational argument. It may sound touchy-feely, but if you can perceive the emotions of others, you have a chance to turn them to your advantage. The more you know about someone, the more power you have. TACTICAL EMPATHY We had one big problem that day in Harlem: no telephone number to call into the apartment. So for six straight hours, relieved periodically by two FBI agents who were learning crisis negotiation, I spoke through the apartment door. I used my late-night FM DJ voice. I didn't give orders in my DJ voice, or ask what the fugitives wanted. Instead, I imagined myself in their place. "It looks like you don't want to come out," I said repeatedly. "It seems like you worry that if you open the door, we'll come in with guns blazing. It looks like you don't want to go back to jail." For six hours, we got no response. The FBI coaches loved my DJ voice. But was it working? And then, when we were almost completely convinced that no one was inside, a sniper on an adjacent building radioed that he saw one of the curtains in the apartment move. The front door of the apartment slowly opened. A woman emerged with her hands in front of her. I continued talking. All three fugitives came out. None of them said a word until we had them in handcuffs. Then I asked them the question that was most nagging: Why did they come out after six hours of radio silence? Why did they finally give in? All three gave me the same answer. "We didn't want to get caught or get shot, but you calm us down," they said. "We finally believed you wouldn't go away, so we just came out." There is nothing more frustrating or disruptive to any negotiation than getting the feeling you are talking to someone who isn't listening. Playing dumb is a valid negotiating technique, and "I don't understand" is a legitimate response. But ignoring the other party's position only builds up frustration and makes them less likely to do what you want. The opposite of that is tactical empathy. In my negotiating course, I tell my students that empathy is "the ability to recognize the perspective of a counterpart, and the vocalization of that recognition." That's an academic way of saying that empathy is paying attention to another human being, asking what they are feeling, and making a commitment to understanding their world. Notice I didn't say anything about agreeing with the other person's values and beliefs or giving out hugs. That's sympathy. What I'm talking about is trying to understand a situation from another person's perspective. One step beyond that is tactical empathy. Tactical empathy is understanding the feelings and mindset of another in the moment and also hearing what is behind those feelings so you increase your influence in all the moments that follow. It's emotional intelligence on steroids. As a cop in Kansas City, I was curious about how a select handful of veteran cops managed to talk angry, violent people out of fights or to get them to put down their knives and guns. When I asked how they did that, I rarely got more than a shrug. They couldn't articulate what they did. But now I know the answer is tactical empathy. They were able to think from another person's point of view while they were talking with that person and quickly assess what was driving them. Most of us enter verbal combat unlikely to persuade anyone of anything, but if you want to increase your neural resonance skills, take a moment right now and practice. Turn your attention to someone who's talking near you or watch a person being interviewed on TV. As they talk, imagine that you are that person. Visualize yourself in the position they describe and put in as much detail as you can, as if you were actually there. But be warned, a lot of classic deal makers will think your approach is softheaded and weak. Just ask former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. A few years ago during a speech at Georgetown University, Clinton advocated, "Showing respect, even for one's enemies. Trying to understand and, insofar as psychologically possible, empathize with their perspective and point of view." You can predict what happened next. A gaggle of pundits and politicians pounced on her. They called her statement inane and naive, and even a sign she had embraced the Muslim Brotherhood. Some said that she had blown her chances at a presidential run. The problem with all of that hot air is that she was right. Politics aside, empathy is not about being nice or agreeing with the other side. It's about understanding them. Empathy helps us learn the position the enemy is in, why their actions make sense (to them), and what might move them.

building hallway, the two FBI negotiating students and I took turns speaking. We rotated in order to avoid verbal stumbles and other errors caused by tiredness. And we stayed relentlessly on message, all three of us saying the same thing. Now, pay close attention to exactly what we said: "It looks like you don't want to come out. It seems like you worry that if you open the door, we'll come in with guns blazing. It looks like you don't want to go back to jail." We employed our tactical empathy by recognizing and then verbalizing the predictable emotions of the situation. We didn't just put ourselves in the fugitives' shoes. We spotted their feelings, turned them into words, and then very calmly and respectfully repeated their emotions back to them. In a negotiation, that's called labeling. Labeling is a way of validating someone's emotion by acknowledging it. Give someone's emotion a name and you show you identify with how that person feels. It gets you close to someone without asking about external factors you know nothing about ("How's your family?"). Think of labeling as a shortcut to intimacy, a time-saving emotional hack. Labeling has a special advantage when your counterpart is tense. Exposing negative thoughts to daylight— "It looks like you don't want to go back to jail" —makes them seem less frightening. In one brain imaging study, psychology professor Matthew Lieberman of the University of California, Los Angeles, found that when people are shown photos of faces expressing strong emotion, the brain shows greater activity in the amygdala, the part that generates fear. But when they are asked to label the emotion, the activity moves to the areas that govern rational thinking. In other words, labeling an emotion—applying rational words to a fear—disrupts its raw intensity. Labeling is a simple, versatile skill that lets you reinforce a good aspect of the negotiation, or diffuse a negative one. But it has very specific rules about form and delivery. That makes it less like chatting than like a formal art such as Chinese calligraphy. For most people, it's one of the most awkward negotiating tools to use. Before they try it the first time, my students almost always tell me they expect their counterpart to jump up and shout, "Don't you dare tell me how I feel!" Let me let you in on a secret: people never even notice. The first step to labeling is detecting the other person's emotional state. Outside that door in Harlem we couldn't even see the fugitives, but most of the time you'll have a wealth of information from the other person's words, tone, and body language. We call that trinity "words, music, and dance." The trick to spotting feelings is to pay close attention to changes people undergo when they respond to external events. Most often, those events are your words. If you say, "How is the family?" and the corners of the other party's mouth turn down even when they say it's great, you might detect that all is not well; if their voice goes flat when a colleague is mentioned, there could be a problem between the two; and if your landlord unconsciously fidgets his feet when you mention the neighbors, it's pretty clear that he doesn't think much of them (we'll dig deeper into how to spot and use these cues in Chapter 9). Picking up on these tiny pieces of information is how psychics work. They size up their client's body language and ask him a few innocent questions. When they "tell" his future a few minutes later, they don't say that was what it was. They just said it seems like that. The last rule of labeling is silence. Once you've thrown out a label, be quiet and listen. We all have a tendency to expand on what we've said, to finish, "It seems like you like the way that shirt looks," with a specific question like "Where did you get it?" A label's power is that it invites the other person to reveal himself. If you'll trust me for a second, take a break now and try it out: Strike up a conversation and put a label on one of the other person's emotions—it doesn't matter if you're talking to the mailman or your ten-year-old daughter—and then go silent. Let the label do its work. Labeling is a tactic, not a strategy, in the same way a spoon is a great tool for stirring soup but it's not a recipe. How you use labeling will go a long way in determining your success. Deployed well, it's how we as negotiators identify and then slowly alter the inner voices of our counterpart's consciousness to something more collaborative and trusting.

needed to call and assuage him to straighten out the situation, or I risked being expelled. Top guys like to feel on top. They don’t want to be disrespected. All the more so when the office they run isn't a sexy assignment. “Bless me, Father, for I have sinned,” I said when he answered the phone. There was a long pause at the other end of the line. “Who is this?” he said. “Bless me, Father, for I have sinned,” I repeated. “It’s Chris Voss.” Again there was a long silence. “Does your boss know you're here?” I said he did, and crossed my fingers. At this point, the FBI official would have been completely within his rights to tell me to leave Canada immediately. But by mentioning the negative dynamic, I knew I had diffused it as much as I could. I had a chance. “All right, you've got country clearance,” he finally said. “I'll take care of the paperwork.” Try this the next time you have to apologize for a bone-headed mistake. Go right at it. The fastest and most efficient means of establishing a quick working relationship is to acknowledge the negative and diffuse it. Whenever I was dealing with the family of a hostage, I started out by saying I knew they were scared. And when I make a mistake—something that happens a lot—I always acknowledge the other person's anger. I've found the phrase “Look, I'm an asshole” to be an amazingly effective way to make problems go away. That approach has never failed me. Let's go back to the cranky grandfather. He's grumpy because he never sees the family and he feels left out. So he's speaking up in his own dysfunctional way to get attention. How do you fix that? Instead of addressing his grumpy behavior, you acknowledge his sadness in a nonjudgmental way. You head him off before he can really get started. “We don't see each other all that often,” you could say. “It seems like you feel like we don't pay any attention to you and you only see us once a year, so why should you make time for us?” Notice how that acknowledges the situation and labels his sadness? Here you can pause briefly, letting him recognize and appreciate your attempts to understand what he's feeling, and then turn the situation around by offering a positive solution. “For us this is a real treat. We want to hear what you have to talk about. We want to value this time with you because we feel left out of your life.” Research shows that the best way to deal with negativity is to observe it, without reaction and without judgment. Then consciously label each negative feeling and replace it with positive, compassionate, and solution-based thoughts. One of my Georgetown University students, a guy named TJ, who worked as an assistant controller at the Washington Redskins, put that lesson to work while he was taking my negotiations class. The economy was in the toilet at the time, and Redskins season ticket holders were leaving in droves to avoid the cost. Worse, the team had been terrible the year before, and stress they were causing, it diffused the biggest negative dynamic—their delinquency—and turned the issue into something solvable. The simple changes TJ made in the script had a deep emotional resonance with the delinquent ticket holders. It mentioned their debt to the team but also acknowledged the team's debt to them, and by labeling the tough economic times, it diffused the negative reaction in your counterpart's amygdala. Once they've been labeled and brought into the open, the negative reactions in your counterpart's amygdala will begin to soften. I promise it will shock you how suddenly his language turns from worry to optimism. Empathy is a powerful mood enhancer. The road is not always cleared so easily, so don't be demoralized if this process seems to go slowly.

Heartwarming snapshots and handwritten letters from projects that matched the woman’s profile, and then collect a check when the donor’s eyes lit up. It was almost easy. One day, though, she met the immovable donor. Once the woman sat down in her office, my student began to throw out the projects her research had said would fit. But the woman shook her head at one project after another. My student found herself growing perplexed at the difficult donor who had no interest in donating. But she held her emotion in check and reached back to a lesson from my recent class on labeling. “I’m sensing some hesitation with these projects,” she said in what she hoped was a level voice. As if she’d been uncorked, the woman exclaimed: “I want my gift to directly support programming for Girl Scouts and not anything else.” This helped focus the conversation, but as my student put forth project after project that seemed to fulfill the donor’s criteria, all she got was still rejection. Sensing the potential donor’s growing frustration, and wanting to end on a positive note so that they might be able to meet again, my student used another label. “It seems that you are really passionate about this gift and want to find the right project reflecting the opportunities and life-changing experiences the Girl Scouts gave you.” And with that, this “difficult” woman signed a check without even picking a specific project. “You understand me,” she said as she got up to leave. “I trust you’ll find the right project.” Fear of her money being misappropriated was the presenting dynamic that the first label uncovered. But the second label uncovered the underlying dynamic—her very presence in the office was driven by very specific memories of being a little Girl Scout and how it changed her life. The obstacle here wasn’t finding the right match for the woman. It wasn’t that she was this highly finicky, hard-to-please donor. The real obstacle was that this woman needed to feel that she was understood, that the person handling her money knew why she was in that office and understood the memories that were driving her actions. That’s why labels are so powerful and so potentially transformative to the state of any conversation. By digging beneath what seems like a mountain of quibbles, details, and logistics, labels help to uncover and identify the primary emotion driving almost all of your counterpart’s behavior, the emotion that, once acknowledged, seems to miraculously solve everything else. DO AN ACCUSATION AUDIT On the first day of negotiating class each semester, I march the group through an introductory exercise called “sixty seconds or she dies.” I play a hostage-taker and a student has to convince me to release my hostage within a minute. It’s an icebreaker that shows me the level of my students, and it reveals to them how much they need to learn. (Here’s a little secret: the hostage never gets out.) Sometimes students jump right in, but finding takers is usually hard because it means coming to the front of the class and competing with the guy who holds all the cards. If I just ask for a volunteer, my students sit on their hands and look away. You’ve been there. You can almost feel your back muscles tense as you think, Oh please, don’t call on me. So I don’t ask. Instead, I say, “In case you’re worried about volunteering to role-play with me in front of the class, I want to tell you in advance . . . it’s going to be horrible.” After the laughter dies down, I then say, “And those of you who do volunteer will probably get more out of this than anyone else.” I always end up with more volunteers than I need. Now, look at what I did: I prefaced the conversation by labeling my audience’s fears; how much worse can something be than horrible? I defuse them and wait, letting it sink in and thereby making the unreasonable seem impossible. All of us have intuitively done something close to this thousands of times. You’ll start a criticism of a friend by saying, “I don’t want to offend you, but . . .” It seems both artificial and self-loathing. It seems like it would make things worse. But then I remind them that it’s exactly what I did the first day of class when I labeled their fears of the hostage game in advance. And they all admit that none of them knew. As an example, I’m going to use the experience of one of my students, Anna, because I couldn’t be more proud at how she turned what she learned in my class into $1 million. At the time, Anna was representing a major government contractor. Her firm had won a competition for a sizable government deal by partnering with a smaller company, let’s call it ABC Corp., whose CEO had a close relationship with the government client representative. Problems started right after they won the contract, though. Because ABC’s relationship had been instrumental in winning the deal, ABC felt that it was owed a piece of the pie whether it fulfilled its part of the contract or not. And so, while the contract paid them for the work of nine people, they continually cut back support. As Anna’s company had to perform ABC’s work, the relationship between ABC and Anna’s company fragmented into vituperative emails and bitter complaining. Facing an already low profit margin, Anna’s company was forced into tough negotiations to get ABC to take a cut to 5.5 people. The negotiations left a bitter aftertaste on both sides. The vituperative emails stopped, but then again all emails stopped. And no communication is always a bad sign. A few months after those painful talks, the client demanded a major rethink on the project and Anna’s firm was faced with losing serious money if it didn’t get ABC to agree to further cuts. Because ABC wasn’t living up to its side of the bargain, Anna’s firm would have had strong contractual grounds to cut out ABC altogether. But that would have damaged Anna’s firm’s reputation with a very important customer, and could have led to litigation from ABC. Faced with this scenario, Anna set up a meeting with ABC where she and her partners planned to inform ABC that its pay was being cut to three people. “You understand me,” she said as she got up to leave. “I trust you’ll find the right project.”

a’s
sleep for weeks. She needed to extract concessions while improving the relationship at the same time. No easy task, right? To prepare, the first thing Anna did was sit down with her negotiating partner, Mark, and list every negative charge that ABC could level at them. The relationship had gone sour long before, so the list was huge. But the biggest possible accusations were easy to spot: “You are the typical prime contractor trying to force out the small guy.” “You promised us we would have all this work and you reneged on your promise.” “You could have told us about this issue weeks ago to help us prepare.” Anna and Mark then took turns role-playing the two sides, with one playing ABC and the other disarming these accusations with anticipatory labels. “You’re going to think we are a big, bad prime contractor when we are done,” Anna practiced saying slowly and naturally. “It seems like you feel this work was promised to you from the beginning,” Mark said. They trained in front of an observer, honing their pacing; deciding at what point they would label each fear; and planning when to include meaningful pauses. It was theater. When the day of the meeting arrived, Anna opened by acknowledging ABC’s biggest gripes. “We understand that we brought you on board with the shared goal of having you lead this work,” she said. “You may feel like we have treated you unfairly, and that we changed the deal significantly since then. We acknowledge that you believe you were promised this work.” This received an emphatic nod from the ABC representatives, so Anna continued by outlining the situation in a way that encouraged the ABC reps to see the firms as teammates, peppering her statements with open-ended questions that showed she was listening: “What else is there you feel is important to add to this?” By labeling the fears and asking for input, Anna was able to elicit an important fact about ABC’s fears, namely that ABC was expecting this to be a high-profit contract because it thought Anna’s firm was doing quite well from the deal. This provided an entry point for Mark, who explained that the client’s new demands had turned his firm’s profits into losses, meaning that he and Anna needed to cut ABC’s pay further, to three people. Angela, one of ABC’s representatives, gasped. “It sounds like you think we are the big, bad prime contractor trying to push out the small business,” Anna said, heading off the accusation before it could be made. “No, no, we don’t think that,” Angela said, conditioned by the acknowledgment to look for common ground. With the negatives labeled and the worst accusations laid bare, Anna and Mark were able to turn the conversation to the contract. Watch what they do closely, as it’s brilliant: they acknowledge ABC’s situation while simultaneously shifting the onus of offering a solution to the smaller company. “It sounds like you have a great handle on how the government contract should work,” Anna said, labeling Angela’s expertise. “Yes—but I know that’s not how it always goes,” Angela answered, proud to have her experience acknowledged. Anna then asked Angela how she would amend the contract so that everyone made some money, which pushed Angela to admit that she saw no way to do so without cutting ABC’s worker count. Several weeks later, the contract was tweaked to cut ABC’s payout, which brought Anna’s company $1 million that put the contract into the black. But it was Angela’s reaction at the end of the meeting that most surprised Anna. After Anna had acknowledged that she had given Angela some bad news and that she understood how angry she must feel, Angela said: “This is not a good situation but we appreciate the fact that you are acknowledging what happened, and we don’t feel like you are mistreating us. And you are not the ‘Big Bad Prime.’” Anna’s reaction to how this turned out? “Holy crap, this stuff actually works!” She’s right. As you just saw, the beauty of going right after negativity is that it brings us to a safe zone of empathy. Every one of us has an inherent, human need to be understood, to connect with the person across from us. Following on the heels of an argument is a great position for a negotiator because your counterpart is desperate for an empathetic connection. Smile, and you’re already an improvement. To start, watch how Ryan turns that heated exchange to his advantage. Following on the heels of an argument is a great position for a negotiator because your counterpart is desperate for an empathetic connection. Smile, and you’re already an improvement.

he Northeast had rippled through the system, Ryan again labels the negative and then mirrors her answer to encourage her to delve further. "It seems like it's been a hectic day." "There've been a lot of 'irate consumers', you know? I mean, I get it, even though I don't like to be yelled at. A lot of people are trying to get to Austin for the big game." "The big game?" Now let's pause. Up to this point, Ryan has been using labels and mirrors to build a relationship with Wendy. To her, it must seem like idle chatter, though, because he hasn't asked for anything. Unlike the angry couple, Ryan is acknowledging her situation. His words ping-pong between "What's that?" and "I hear you," both of which invite her to elaborate. Now that the empathy has been built, she lets slip a piece of information he can use. "Yeah, all through the weekend. Though who knows how many people will make the flights. The weather's probably going to reroute a lot of people through a lot of different places." Here's where Ryan finally swoops in with an ask. But notice how he acts: not assertive or coldly logical, but with empathy and labeling that acknowledges her situation and tacitly puts them in the same boat. "Well, it seems like you've been handling the rough day pretty well," he says. "I was also affected by the weather delays and missed my connecting flight. It seems like this flight is likely booked solid, but with what you said, maybe someone affected by the weather might miss this connection. Is there any possibility a seat will be open?" Listen to that riff: Label, tactical empathy, label. And only then a request. At this point, Wendy says nothing and begins typing on her computer. Ryan, eager not to talk himself out of a possible deal, engages in some silence. After thirty seconds, Wendy prints a boarding pass and hands it to Ryan, explaining that there were a few seats that were supposed to be filled by people who would now arrive much later than the flight's departure. To make Ryan's success even better, she puts him in Economy Plus seating. All that in under two minutes! The next time you find yourself following an angry customer at a corner store or airplane line, take a moment and practice labels and mirrors on the service person. I promise they won't scream, "Don't try to control me!" and burst into flames—and you might walk away with a little more than you expected. KEY LESSONS As you try to insert the tools of tactical empathy into your daily life, I encourage you to think of them as extensions of natural human interactions and not artificial conversational tics. In any interaction, it pleases us to feel that the other side is listening and acknowledging our situation. Whether you are negotiating a business deal or simply chatting to the person at the supermarket butcher counter, creating an empathetic relationship and encouraging your counterpart to expand on their situation is the basis of healthy human interaction. These tools, then, are nothing less than emotional best practices that help you cure the pervasive ineptitude that marks our most critical conversations in life. They will help you connect and create more meaningful and warm relationships. That they might help you extract what you want is a bonus; human connection is the first goal. With that in mind, I encourage you to take the risk of sprinkling these in every conversation you have. I promise you that they will feel awkward and artificial at first, but keep at it. Learning to walk felt awful Strange, too. As you internalize these techniques, turning the artifice of tactical empathy into a habit and then into an integral part of your personality, keep in mind these lessons from the chapter you've just read: Imagine yourself in your counterpart's situation. The beauty of empathy is that it doesn't demand that you agree with their perspective; you only need to understand and acknowledge it. Labeling the person's words or feelings can help reinforce a positive perception or dynamic without resorting to direct affirmation. Remember, you're dealing with a person who wants to be appreciated and understood. So use labels to reinforce and encourage positive perceptions and dynamics. CHAPTER 4 BEWARE "YES"—MASTER "NO" Let me paint a scenario we've all experienced: You're at home, just before dinner, and the phone rings. It is, no surprise, a telemarketer. He wants to sell you magazine subscriptions, water filters, frozen Argentine beef—to be honest, it doesn't matter, as the script is always the same. After butchering your name, and engaging in some disingenuous pleasantries, he launches into his pitch. The hard sell that comes next is a scripted flowchart designed to cut off your escape routes as it funnels you down a path with no exit but "Yes." "Do you enjoy a nice glass of water from time to time?" "Well, yes, but..." "Me too. And like me, I bet you like crisp, clean water with no chemical aftertaste, like Mother Nature made it." "Well, yes, but..." Compromise and concession, even to the truth, feels like defeat. And "No," well, "No" feels like salvation, like an oasis. You're tempted to use "No" when it's blatantly untrue, just to hear its sweet sound. Now let's think about this selling technique. It's designed to get to "Yes" at all costs, as if "No" were death. And for many of us, it is. We have all these negative connotations with "No." We talk about the rejection of "No," about the fear of hearing it. "No" is the ultimate negative word. But at the end of the day, "Yes" is often a meaningless answer that hides deeper objections (and "Maybe" is even worse). Pushing hard for "Yes" doesn't get a negotiator any closer to resolving the issue or finding a solution that works for both parties. It merely creates a false sense of agreement and understanding, which can lead to misunderstandings, resentment, and ultimately a breakdown in communication. So instead of focusing solely on getting a "Yes" or a "No," it's more productive to focus on understanding the other person's perspective and finding a mutually beneficial solution that meets both parties' needs and concerns.

closer to a win; it just angers the other side. So if "Yes" can be so damn uncomfortable, and "No" such a relief, why have we fetishized one and demonized the other? We have it backward. For good negotiators, "No" is pure gold. That negative provides a great opportunity for you and the other party to clarify what you really want by eliminating what you don't want. "No" is a safe choice that maintains the status quo; it provides a temporary oasis of control. At some point in their development, all negotiators have to come to grips with "No." When you come to realize the real psychological dynamic behind it, you'll love the word. It's not just that you lose your fear of it, but that you come to learn what it does for you and how you can build deals out of it. "Yes" and "Maybe" are often worthless. But "No" always alters the conversation. "NO" STARTS THE NEGOTIATION My fascination with "No" in all its beautiful nuance began with a conversation I had a few months before my negotiation career began. I started my career with the Bureau as a member of the FBI SWAT team in the Pittsburgh Division but after nearly two years I was transferred to New York, where the FBI attached me to the Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF). It was an amazing post: We spent our days and nights tracking suspected terrorists, investigating their cells, and assessing whether or how they might strike. We were untying knots of human anger in the midst of America's biggest city, making life-and-death decisions on who was dangerous and who was just blowing hot air. The work fascinated me. Ever since my first days with the Bureau, I had been obsessed with crisis response. The immediacy of the task entranced me. The stakes were high. Lives hung in the balance. The emotional terrain was complex, changing, and often conflicting. To successfully gain a hostage's safe release, a negotiator had to penetrate the hostage-taker's motives, state of mind, intelligence, and emotional strengths and weaknesses. The negotiator played the role of bully, conciliator, enforcer, savior, confessor, instigator, and peacemaker—and that's just a few of the parts. I thought I was cut out for every one of them. A few weeks after I got to Manhattan, I showed up at the desk of Amy Bonderow, who ran the FBI's Crisis Negotiation Team in New York. I didn't know beans about negotiating, so I went for the direct approach. "I want to be a hostage negotiator," I said. "Everyone does—got any training?" she asked. "No," I said. "Any credentials?" "Nope." I answered. "Any experience?" she asked. "No," I answered. "Do you have a degree in psychology, sociology, anything at all related to negotiation?" "No." My conversation with Amy kicked off my awareness of the complex and hidden subtleties of conversation, the power of certain words, the seemingly unintelligible emotional truths that so often underlie intelligible exchanges. A trap into which many fall is to take what other people say literally. I started to see that while having protected myself, I could relax and more easily consider the possibilities. "No" is the start of the negotiation, not the end of it. We've been conditioned to fear the word "No." But it is a statement of perception far more often than of fact. It seldom means, "I have considered all the facts and made a rational choice." Instead, "No" is often a decision, frequently temporary, to maintain the status quo. Change is scary, and "No" provides a little protection from that scariness. Jim Camp, in his excellent book, Start with NO, counsels the reader to give their adversary (his word for counterpart) permission to say "No" from the outset of a negotiation. He calls it "the right to veto." He observes that people will fight to the death to preserve their right to say "No," so give them that right and the negotiating environment becomes more constructive and collaborative almost immediately. When I read Camp's book, I realized this was something we'd known as hostage negotiators for years. We'd learned that the quickest way to get a hostage-taker out was to take the time to talk them out, as opposed to "demanding" their surrender. Demanding their surrender, "telling" them to come out, always ended up creating a much longer standoff—and occasionally actually contributed to death. It comes down to the deep and universal human need for autonomy. People need to feel in control. When you preserve a person's autonomy by clearly giving them permission to say "No" to your ideas, the emotions calm, the effectiveness of the decisions goes up, and the other party can really look at your proposal. They're allowed to hold it in their hands, to turn it around. And it gives you time to elaborate or pivot in order to convince your counterpart that the change you're proposing is more advantageous than the status quo. Great negotiators seek "No" because they know that's often when the real negotiation begins. Pol

gree;CLUD
You are making me feel uncomfortable;
I do not understand;
I don’t think I can afford it;
I want something else;
I need more information; or
I want to talk it over with someone else.
Then, after pausing, ask solution-based questions or simply label their effect:
“What about this doesn’t work for you?”
“What would you need to make it work?”
“It seems like there's something here that bothers you.”
People have a need to say, “No.” So don’t just hope to hear it at some point; get them to say it early.
PERSUADE IN THEIR WORLD
I'd like to present you with a guy named Joe Businessman as he readies himself for a negotiation. You've met him before. He's the prepared type, with all his Getting to Yes strategies written out and memorized. And he's more than ready to unleash them on the guy across the table. Joe pauses to look at his expensive suit in the mirror, fantasizing about the impressive things he'll say and the fancy charts and graphs that'll back up those things and leave his counterpart - his opponent - vanquished and in defeat. He is Russell Crowe in Gladiator. He is The Man.
Now allow me to let you in on a secret: none of that preparation will mean a damn thing. His negotiation style is all me, me, me, ego, ego, ego. And when the people on the other side of the table pick up those signals, they're going to decide that it's best to politely, even furtively, ignore this Superman.
“Huh?” you say.
Sure, the word they'll say right off is “Yes,” but that word is only a tool to get this blowhard to go away. They'll weasel out later, claiming changing conditions, budget issues, the weather. For now, they just want to be released because Joe isn't convincing them of anything; he's only convincing himself.
I'll let you in on a secret. There are actually three kinds of “Yes”: Counterfeit, Confirmation, and Commitment.
A counterfeit "yes" is one in which your counterpart plans on saying “no” but either feels “yes” is an easier escape route or just wants to disingenuously keep the conversation going to obtain more information or some other kind of edge. A confirmation “yes” is generally innocent, a reflexive response to a black-or-white question; it's sometimes used to lay a trap but mostly it's just simple affirmation with no promise of action. And a commitment "yes" is the real deal; it's a true agreement that leads to action, a “yes” at the table that guarantees results.
For my review, Jim motioned me to the chair in front of him and gave me his biggest smile. I must have returned it with twice the wattage.
“Well, Chris,” he said, still smiling. “That was one of the worst calls I ever heard.”
I stared at him, gape-jawed.
“Jim, did you hear Daryl congratulate me?” I asked. “I talked him down, man. I killed it.”
As I listened to what Jim said, I felt that acid stomach rush you get when you are forced to accept that the guy dumping on you is completely right. Daryl's response had been a kind of "yes," but it had been anything but a true commitment "yes." He'd made no promise to action. His “yes” had been designed to make me feel good enough to leave him

had created an environment where she was in control and her supervisor felt safe enough to make the decision to reinstate her. Her counterpart had no choice but to agree, as he wanted to avoid embarrassment for himself and the FBI. By framing the situation as a binary choice with "No" being the only logical option, Marti was able to convince him to give in without resorting to manipulation or deceit. This technique is powerful because it allows negotiators to get past defensive barriers and reach the desired outcome more efficiently.

The important thing here is that Marti not only accepted the “No”; she searched it out and embraced it. At a recent sales conference, I asked the participants for the one word they all dread. The entire group yelled, "No!" To them—and to almost everyone—"No" means one thing: end of discussion. But that's not what it means.
"No" is not failure. Used strategically, it's an answer that opens the path forward. Getting to the point where you're no longer horrified by the word "No" is a liberating moment that every negotiator needs to reach. Because if your biggest fear is "No," you can't negotiate. You're the hostage of "Yes." You're handcuffed. You're done.
So let's undress "No." It's a reaffirmation of autonomy. It is not a use or abuse of power; it is not an act of rejection; it is not a manifestation of stubbornness; it is not the end of the negotiation.
In fact, "No" often opens the discussion up. The sooner you say "No," the sooner you're willing to see options and opportunities that you were blind to previously. Saying "No" often spurs people to action because they feel they've protected themselves and now see an opportunity slipping away.
Since I've demystified "No" for myself, I've found the ideas, perceptions, and baggage that people have with that two-letter word to be fascinating. To me, it's like watching a movie or a music video from the 1980s for the umpteenth time. You can identify with the experience—while simultaneously being conscious of the fact that the world, and you, have moved on.
Today, I coach my students to learn to see "No" for what it is. Rather than harming them or those they negotiate with, "No" protects and benefits all parties in an exchange. "No" creates safety, security, and the feeling of control. It's a requirement to implementable success. It's a pause, a nudge, and a chance for the speaker to articulate what they do want.
As you can see, "No" has a lot of skills.
- "No" allows the real issues to be brought forth;
- "No" protects people from making—and lets them correct—ineffective decisions;
- "No" slows things down so that people can freely embrace their decisions and the agreements they enter into;
- "No" helps people feel safe, secure, emotionally comfortable, and in control of their decisions;
- "No" moves you closer to a "Yes."
One negotiating genius who's impossible to miss is Mark Cuban, the billionaire owner of the Dallas Mavericks. I always quote to my students one of his best lines on negotiation: "Every 'No' gets me closer to a 'Yes.'" But then I remind them that extracting those "No's" on the road to "Yes" isn't always easy.
There is a big difference between making your counterpart feel that they can say "No" and actually getting them to say it. Sometimes, if you're talking to somebody who is just not listening, the only way you can crack their cranium is to antagonize them into "No."
One great way to do this is to mislabel one of the other party's emotions or desires. You say something that you know is totally wrong, like "So it seems that you really are eager to leave your job" when they clearly want to stay. That forces them to listen and makes them comfortable correcting you by saying, "No, that's not it. This is it."
Another way to force "No" in a negotiation is to ask the other party what they don't want. "Let's talk about what you would say 'No' to," you'd say. And people are comfortable saying "No" here because it feels like self-protection. And once you've gotten them to say "No," people are much more open to moving forward toward new options and ideas.
"No"—or the lack thereof—also serves as a warning, the canary in the coal mine. If despite all your efforts, the other party won't say "No," you're dealing with people who are indecisive or confused or who have a hidden agenda. In cases like that, you have to end the negotiation and walk away.
Think of it like this: No "No" means no go.
EMAIL MAGIC: HOW NEVER TO BE IGNORED AGAIN
There's nothing more irritating than being ignored. Being turned down is bad, but getting no response at all is the pits. It makes you feel invisible, as if you don't exist. And it's a waste of your time. We've all been through it: You send an email to someone you're trying to do business with and they ignore you. Then you send a polite follow-up and they stonewall you.

The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts.
Repair it into clean, readable English.
Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
u	again.	So	what	do	you	do?
You	provoke	a	“No”	with	this	one-sentence	email.
Have	you	given	up	on	this	project?
The	point	is	that	this	one-sentence	email	encapsulates	the
best	 of	 “No”-oriented	 questions	 and	 plays	 on	 your
counterpart’s	 natural	 human	 aversion	 to	 loss.	 The	 “No”
answer	the	email	demands	offers	the	other	party	the	feeling
of	safety	and	the	illusion	of	control	while	encouraging	them
to	define	their	position	and	explain	it	to	you.
Just	 as	 important,	 it	 makes	 the	 implicit	 threat	 that	 you
will	walk	 away	on	your	own	 terms.	 To	 stop	 that	from
happening—to	cut	their	losses	and	prove	their	power—the /******/other	party’s	natural	inclination	is	to	reply	immediately	and
disagree.	
No,	 our	 priorities	 haven’t	 changed.	 We’ve	 just
gotten	bogged	down	and	.	.	.
If	 you’re	 a	 parent,	 you	 already	use	this	technique
instinctively.	What	 do	 you	do	when	 your	kids	 won’t	 leave
the	house/park/mall?	You	say,	“Fine.	I’m	leaving,”	and	you
begin	 to	 walk	 away.	 I’m	 going	 to	 guess	 that	 well	 over	 half
the	time	they	yell,	“No,	wait!”	and	run	to	catch	up.	No	one
likes	to	be	abandoned.
Now,	this	may	seem	like	a	rude	way	to	address	someone
in	business,	but	you	have	to	get	over	that.	It’s	not	rude,	and
though	 it’s	 direct,	 it’s	 cloaked	 with	 the	 safety	 of	 “No.”
Ignoring	you	is	what’s	rude.	I	can	tell	you	that	I’ve	used	this
successfully	 not	 just	 in	 North	America,	 but	 with	 people	 in
two	 different	 cultures	 (Arabic	 and	 Chinese)	 famous	 for
never	saying	“No.”
KEY	LESSONS
Using	 this	 chapter’s	 tools	in	 daily	 life	 is	 difficult	 for	 many
people	 because	 they	 go	 directly	 against	 one	 of	 society’s
biggest	social	dictums.	That	is,	“Be	nice.”
We’ve	 instrumentalized	 niceness	as	 a	 way	 to	 gain	 approval	 and
influence,	 but	 the	 truth	is	that	it	doesn’t	work	very	well.	Only	by
understanding	and	respecting	the	other	person’s	needs	and	concerns	can	we
truly	change	their	behavior.
CHAPTER	5
TRIGGER	THE	TWO	WORDS
THAT	IMMEDIATELY
TRANSFORM	ANY
NEGOTIATION
I
n	August	2000,	the	militant	Islamic	group	Abu	Sayyaf,	in
the	 southern	 Philippines,	 broadcast	 that	 it	 had	 captured	 a
CIA	agent.	The	truth	was	not	as	newsworthy,	or	as	valuable
to	the	rebels.
Abu	 Sayyaf	 had	 kidnapped	 Jeffrey	 Schilling,	 a	 twenty-
four-year-old	American	who	had	traveled	near	their	base	in
Jolo	Island.	A	California	native,	Schilling	became	a	hostage
with	a	$10	million	price	tag	on	his	head.
At	 the	 time	 I	 was	 a	 Supervisory	 Special	 Agent	 (SSA)
attached	 to	 the	 FBI’s	 elite	 Crisis	 Negotiation	 Unit	 (CNU).
The	 CNU	 is	 the	 equivalent	 of	 the	 special	 forces	 of
negotiations.	 It’s	 attached	 to	 the	 FBI’s	 Hostage	 Rescue
Team	 (HRT).	 Both	 are	 national	 counterterrorist	 response
assets.	They	are	the	best	of	the	best.
The	 CNU	 is	 based	 at	 the	 FBI	 Academy	 in	 Quantico,
Virginia.	The	 FBI	Academy	 has	 come	 to	 be	 known	 by	 the
one	 word,	 “Quantico.”	 Rightly	 or	 wrongly,	 Quantico	 has	 developed	the	 reputation	as	one	of	the	centers,	if	 not	
the	center	of	knowledge,	for	law	 enforcement.	 When	 a
negotiation	 is	 going	 badly	 and	 the	 negotiators	 involved	 are
directed	to	call	and	find	out	what	“Quantico”	has	to	say,	the
CNU	is	who	they	call.
CNU	 developed	 what	 is	 a	 powerful	 staple	 in	 the	 high-
stakes	 world	of	crisis	negotiation,	the	 Behavioral	 Change
Stairway	Model	(BCSM).	The	model	proposes	five	stages—
active	listening,	empathy,	rapport,	influence,	and	behavioral
change—that	take	any	negotiator	from	listening	to
influencing	behavior.
The	origins	of	the	model	can	be	traced	back	to	the	great
American	psychologist	Carl	Rogers,	who	proposed	that	real
change	can	only	come	when	a	therapist	accepts	the	client	as
he	or	she	is—an	approach	known	as	unconditional	positive
regard.	 The	 vast	 majority	 of	 us,	 however,	 as	 Rogers
explained,	come	 to	 expect	 that	love,	 praise,	 and	 approval
are	 dependent	 on	saying	and	doing	the	things	people
(initially,	our	parents)	consider	correct.	That	is,	because	for
most	of	us	the	positive	regard	we	experience	is	conditional,
we	develop	a	habit	of	hiding	who	we	really	are	and	what	we
really	think,	instead	calibrating	our	words	to	gain	approval
but	disclosing	little.
Which	 is	 why	 so	 few	 social	 interactions	 lead	to	actual
behavior	 change.	 Consider	 the	 typical	 patient	with	severe
coronary	 heart	 disease	 recovering	from	open-heart	surgery.
The	 doctor	tells	the	patient:	“This	surgery	isn’t	a	cure.	The
only	way	to	truly	prolong	your	life	is	to	make	the	following
behavior	changes	.	.	.”	The	grateful	patient	responds:	“Yes,
yes,	yes,	of	course,	Doctor!	This	is	my	second	chance.	I	will
change!”
And	 do	 they?	 Study	 after	 study	 has	 shown	that,	 no,
nothing	changes;	two	years	after	their	operation,	more	than
90	percent	of	patients	haven’t	changed	their	lifestyle	at	all.
Though	th

The text you provided contains some font-encoding or glyph artifacts, which need to be repaired to make the content clean and readable in English. Here is the corrected version:

"The text you provided contains some font-encoding or glyph artifacts, which need to be repaired to make the content clean and readable in English. Here is the corrected version:"

"Estakes of an everyday negotiation with your child, boss, or client are usually not as high as that of a hostage (or health crisis) negotiation, the psychological environment necessary for not just temporary in-the-moment compliance, but real gut-level change, is the same. If you successfully take someone up the Behavioral Change Stairway, each stage attempting to engender more trust and more connection, there will be a breakthrough moment when unconditional positive regard is established and you can begin exerting influence."

"After years of refining the BCSM and its tactics, I can teach anyone how to get to that moment. But as cardiologists know all too well, and legions of B-school grads weaned on the most famous negotiating book in the world, getting to yes have ultimately discovered, you more than likely haven't gotten there yet if what you're hearing is the word 'yes.' As you'll soon learn, the sweetest two words in any negotiation are actually 'That's right.'"

"I was a natural for the Schilling case. I had spent some time in the Philippines and had an extensive background in terrorism from my New York City days assigned to the Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF). A few days after Schilling became a hostage, my partner Chuck Regini and I flew to Manila to run the negotiations. Along with Jim Nixon, the FBI's highest official in Manila, we conferred with top Philippine military brass. They agreed to let us guide the negotiations."

"Our principal adversary was Abu Sabaya, the rebel leader who personally negotiated for Schilling's ransom. Sabaya was a veteran of the rebel movement with a violent past. He was straight out of the movies, a terrorist-sociopath-killer. He had a history of rape, murder, and beheadings. He liked to record his bloody deeds on video and send them to the Philippine media. Sabaya always wore sunglasses, a bandana, a black T-shirt, and camo pants. He thought it made him a more dashing figure."

"Sabaya loved, loved, loved the media. He had the Philippines reporters on speed dial. They'd call him and ask him questions in Tagalog, his native tongue. He would answer in English because he wanted the world to hear his voice on CNN. 'They should make a movie about me,' he would tell reporters."

"In my eyes, Sabaya was a cold-blooded businessman with an ego as big as Texas. A real shark. Sabaya knew he was in the commodities game. In Jeffrey Schilling, he had an item of value. How much could he get for it? He would find out, and I intended it to be a surprise he wouldn't like."

"As an FBI agent, I wanted to free the hostage and bring the criminal to justice."

"One crucial aspect of any negotiation is to figure out how your adversary arrived at his position. Sabaya threw out the $10 million ransom based on a business calculation. First, the United States was offering $5 million for information leading to the arrest of any of the remaining fugitives from the 1993 World Trade Center bombing. Sabaya reasoned that if the United States would pay $5 million to get its hands on someone it didn't like, it would pay much more for a Filipino. He explained why the Abu Sayyaf wanted to establish an Islamic state in the southern Philippines. Fishing rights had been violated. You name it, he thought it up and used it."

"Sabaya wanted $10 million in war damages—not ransom, but war damages. He held firm in his demand and kept us out of the offer-counteroffer system we wanted to use against him."

"And he occasionally dropped in threats that he was torturing Jeff Schilling."

"Sabaya negotiated directly with Benjie, a Filipino military officer. They talked in Tagalog. We reviewed transcripts translated to English and used them to advise Benjie. I rotated in and out of Manila and oversaw the talks and strategy. I instructed Benjie to ask what Schilling had to do with five hundred years of bad blood between Muslims and Filipinos."

"No matter what approach we took to 'reason' with Sabaya over why Schilling had nothing to do with the 'war damages,' it fell on deaf ears."

"Our first 'that's right' breakthrough actually came when I was negotiating with Benjie. He was a true Filipino patriot and hero. He was the leader of the Philippine National Police's Special Action Force and had been in his share of firefights. On many occasions, Benjie and his men had been sent on rescue missions to save hostages, and they had a sterling record. His men were feared, for good reason. They rarely took handcuffs."

"Benjie wanted to take a hard line with Sabaya and speak to him in direct, no-nonsense terms. We wanted to engage Sabaya in dialogue to discover what made the adversary tick. We actually wanted to establish rapport with an adversary. To Benjie, that was distasteful."

"Benjie told us he needed a break. We had been working him nearly twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week for several weeks. He wanted to spend some time with his family in the mountains north of Manila. We agreed, but only on the condition that we could accompany him and spend several hours both on Saturday and Sunday working on negotiation strategy."

"That Saturday night we sat in the library of the American ambassador's summer residence working on the strategy. As I was explaining to Benjie the value of establishing a rapport-based, working relationship, even with an adversary as dangerous as Sabaya, I could see a snarl coming over his face. I realized I needed to negotiate with Benji."

"Creating a rapport-based working relationship with the adversary is crucial in these situations. It's not always easy or comfortable, but it's necessary if you want to achieve your goals and bring the hostage home safely."

wasn't what his coach or I had in mind for him.
Every time Brandon played this way, it was a disaster. The opposing team knew exactly where he was on the field because of his aggressive approach. They would set up blockers to keep Brandon from getting to the ball. It was frustrating to watch because we could see what Brandon was trying to do, but the other team wouldn't budge.
Brandon wasn't hearing "that's right." He was only hearing "you're wrong" over and over again. This was a significant issue in our negotiations. We wanted to hear "that's right," but we weren't getting it because we were too focused on proving ourselves correct, rather than understanding the other side and allowing them to be correct as well.
The key is not just trying to convince the other person that you are right; instead, we need to get them to see things our way by acknowledging their version of events without giving in.
To do this, we can use techniques like active listening, mirroring, encouragers, labeling, and paraphrasing. These tactics helped us break through the deadlock with Sabaya and lead to a successful outcome for Jeffrey Schilling.
However, even if you are correct in your negotiations or arguments, it won't matter if the other person doesn't agree with you. You need them on board and willing to work together towards a common goal.
It's important not only to convince others that "you're right," but also to let them know "that's right." It may seem counterintuitive, but acknowledging the other person's perspective can actually help you achieve your desired outcome.

The text contained encoding or glyph artifacts, so I've repaired it into clean, readable English for you:

"Brandon was a ball carrier on his team, but he had difficulty avoiding blockers. His coach pleaded with him to change his behavior, but Brandon couldn’t do it. He loved hitting opposing players and saw flattening them as a source of pride. Both his coach and I tried to explain the situation to him, but we always received the worst possible answer - "You're right."

Whenever someone is bothering you and they won't stop, and they don't want to listen to anything you have to say, what do you tell them to get them to shut up and go away? "You're right." It works every time. Tell people "you're right" and they get a happy smile on their face and leave you alone for at least twenty-four hours. But you haven't agreed to their position. You have used "you're right" to get them to quit bothering you.

I was in the same situation with Brandon. He didn't hear me and embrace my request. What could I say to get through to this kid? How could I reach Brandon and help him change course?

I thought back to Benjie and Sabaya. I took Brandon aside before a crucial game. I had searched my mind for a way to hear the two critical words, "That's right."

"You seem to think it's unmanly to dodge a block," I told him. "You think it's cowardly to get out of someone's way that's trying to hit you."

Brandon stared at me and paused.

"That's right," he said. With those words, Brandon embraced the reality of what was holding him back. Once he understood why he was trying to knock down every blocker, he changed course. He started avoiding the blocks and became an exceptionally fine linebacker."

Quarters to lobby the company CEO. "I would help you in any way," my student said. "But I could help with the networking and also talk you up to the CEO even if I were at headquarters with the consumer products division, right?" "That's right," he said. "If you get an offer from the consumer products unit, I will approve it." Bingo! By asking questions that got him to "that's right," my student had achieved his goal. He also got his boss to reveal two "Black Swans," the unspoken, underlying breakthrough dynamics of a negotiation (explored in more detail in Chapter 10):

■ His boss needed someone to help him network and communicate in headquarters.
■ His boss would be up for a promotion and needed someone to talk him up to the CEO.

My student was able to win the job he desired on the consumer electronics division. And he's been talking up his former boss. "I was stunned," he wrote me in an email. "In this culture it is not really possible to know what a superior is thinking." I have many opportunities to travel the country and speak to business leaders, either in formal speaking engagements or private counseling sessions. I entertain them with war stories, then describe some basic negotiating skills. I always impart a few techniques. Getting to "that's right" is a staple.

After a speech in Los Angeles, one of the attendees, Emily, sent me an email: Hi Chris, I feel compelled to tell you that I just tried the "That's right" technique in a price negotiation with a potential new client. And, I got what I wanted. I'm so excited!

Before I probably would have just gone with the "in-the-middle" suggested price (halfway between my initial offer and her initial counter). Instead, I believe I correctly assessed her motivations, presented her with the right statement to get to a "that's right" (in her mind) . . . and then she proposed the solution I wanted and asked if I would agree to it! So, of course. Thank you!

Emily
And I thought to myself: That's right.

KEY LESSONS "Sleeping in the same bed and dreaming different dreams" is an old Chinese expression that describes the intimacy of partnership (whether in marriage or in business) without the communication necessary to sustain it. Such is the recipe for bad marriages and bad negotiations. With each party having its own set of objectives, its own goals and motivations, the truth is that the conversational niceties—the socially lubricating "yeses" and "you're rights" that get thrown out fast and furious early in any interaction—are not in any way a substitute for real understanding between you and your partner.

The power of getting to that understanding, and not to some simple "yes," is revelatory in the art of negotiation. The moment you've convinced someone that you truly understand her dreams and feelings (the whole world she inhabits), mental and behavioral change becomes possible, and the foundation for a breakthrough has been laid.

Use these lessons to lay that foundation:
■ Creating unconditional positive regard opens the door to changing thoughts and behaviors. Humans have an innate urge toward socially constructive behavior. The more a person feels understood, and positively affirmed in that understanding, the more likely that urge for constructive behavior will take hold.
■ "That's right" is better than "yes." Strive for it. Reaching "that's right" in a negotiation creates breakthroughs.
■ Use a summary to trigger a "that's right." The building blocks of a good summary are a label combined with paraphrasing. Identify, rearticulate, and emotionally affirm "the world according to . . ." And CHAPTER 6 BEND THEIR REALITY One Monday morning in Haiti's capital, the politician's nephew received a ransom call from the kidnappers of his aunt. The guy was so petrified he could only think of doing one thing: paying the thugs. His reaction makes sense: when you get a call from brutal criminals who say they'll kill your aunt unless you pay them immediately, it seems impossible to find leverage in the situation. So you pay the ransom and they release your relative, right? Wrong. There's always leverage. Negotiation is never a linear formula: add X to Y to get Z. We all have irrational and blind spots, hidden needs, and undeveloped notions. Once you understand that subterranean world of unspoken needs and thoughts, you'll discover a universe of variables that can be leveraged to change your counterpart's needs and expectations. Don't compromise. Let's go back to the $150,000 ransom demand. We're always taught to look for the win-win solution, to accommodate, to be reasonable. So what's the win-win here? What's the compromise? The traditional negotiating logic that's drilled into us from an early age, the kind of that exalts compromises, says, "Let's just split the difference and offer them $75,000. Then everyone's happy." No. Just, simply, no. The win-win mindset pushed by so many negotiation books and courses says, "I want a win-win solution," but it doesn't give any clear guidance on how to achieve that. It's an attractive concept, but it's not always the most effective strategy in a high-stakes negotiation.

The text contains no font-encoding or glyph artifacts.

Text:
Otation experts is usually ineffective and often disastrous. At best, it satisfies neither side. And if you employ it with a counterpart who has a win-lose approach, you’re setting yourself up to be swindled. Of course, as we've noted previously, you need to keep the cooperative, rapport-building, empathetic approach, the kind that creates a dynamic in which deals can be made. But you have to get rid of that naivete. Because compromise — “splitting the difference” — can lead to terrible outcomes. Compromise is often a "bad deal" and a key theme we'll hit in this chapter is that "no deal is better than a bad deal." Even in a kidnapping? Yes. A bad deal in a kidnapping is where someone pays and no one comes out. To make my point on compromise, let me paint you an example: A woman wants her husband to wear black shoes with his suit. But her husband doesn't want to; he prefers brown shoes. So what do they do? They compromise, they meet halfway. And, you guessed it, he wears one black and one brown shoe. Is this the best outcome? No! In fact, that's the worst possible outcome. Either of the two other outcomes — black or brown — would be better than the compromise. Next time you want to compromise, remind yourself of those mismatched shoes. So why are we so infatuated with the notion of compromise if it often leads to poor results? The real problem with compromise is that it has come to be known as this great concept in relationships and politics and everything else. Compromise, we are told quite simply, is a sacred moral good. Think back to the ransom demand: Fair is no ransom, and what the nephew wants is to pay nothing. So why is he going to offer $75,000, much less $150,000, for the ransom? There is no validity in the $150,000 request. With any compromise, the nephew ends up with a bizarrely bad result. I'm here to call bullshit on compromise right now. We don't compromise because it's right; we compromise because it's easy and because it saves face. We compromise in order to say that at least we got half the pie. Distilled to its essence, we compromise to be safe. Most people in a negotiation are driven by fear or by the desire to avoid pain. Too few are driven by their actual goals. So don't settle and — here's a simple rule — never split the difference. Creative solutions are almost always preceded by some degree of risk, annoyance, confusion, and conflict. Accommodation and compromise produce none of that. You've got to embrace the hard stuff. That's where the great deals are. And that's what great negotiators do. DEADLINES: MAKE TIME YOUR ALLIY Time is one of the most crucial variables in any negotiation. The simple passing of time and its sharper cousin, the deadline, are the screw that pressures every deal to a conclusion. Whether your deadline is real and absolute or merely a line in the sand, it can trick you into believing that doing a deal now is more important than getting a good deal. Deadlines regularly make people say and do impulsive things that are against their best interests, because we all have a natural tendency to rush as a deadline approaches. What good negotiators do is force themselves to resist this urge and take advantage of it in others. It's not so easy. Ask yourself: What is it about a deadline that causes pressure and anxiety? The answer is consequences; the perception of the loss we'll incur in the future — “The deal is off!” our mind screams at us in some imaginary future scenario — should no resolution be achieved by a certain point in time. When you allow the variable of time to trigger such thinking, you have taken yourself hostage and your leverage has been cut. The mantra we coach our clients on is, “No deal is better than a bad deal.” If that mantra can truly be internalized, and clients begin to believe they've got all the time they need to conduct the negotiation right, their patience becomes a formidable weapon. A few weeks after the Haitian kidnapping boom began, we started to notice two patterns. First, Mondays seemed especially busy, as if the kidnappers had a particularly strong work ethic and wanted to get a jump on the week. And second, the thugs grew increasingly eager to get paid as the weekend approached. At first, this didn't make any sense. But by listening closely to the kidnappers and debriefing the hostages we rescued, we discovered something that should have been obvious: These crimes weren't politically motivated at all. Instead, these guys were garden-variety thugs who wanted to get paid by Friday so they could party through the weekend. Once we understood the pattern and knew the kidnappers’ self-imposed deadline, we had two key pieces of information that totally shifted the leverage to our side. First, if we let the pressure build by stalling the negotiations until Thursday or Friday, we could cut the best deal. And second, because you didn't need anything close to $150,000 to have a good weekend in Haiti, offering a lot, lot less would suffice. How close we were getting to their self-imposed deadline would be indicated by how specific the threats were that they issued. “Give us the money or your aunt is going to die” is an early stage threat, as the time isn't specified. Increasing specificity on threats in any type of negotiation indicates getting closer to real consequences at a real specified time. To gauge the level of a particular threat, we'd pay attention to how many of the four questions — What? Who? When? And how? — were addressed. When people issue threats, they consciously or subconsciously create ambiguities and loopholes they fully intend to exploit. As the loopholes started to close as the week progressed, and did so over and over again in similar ways with different kidnappings, the pattern emerged. With this information in hand, I came to expect the kidnappings to be orderly, four-day events. It didn't make the abductions any more pleasant for the victim, but it certainly made them more predictable — and a whole lot cheaper — for the families on the other end. It's not just with hostage negotiations that deadlines can play into your hands. Car dealers are prone to give you the best price near the end of the month, when their transactions are assessed. And corporate salespeople work on a quarterly basis and are most vulnerable as the quarter comes to a close. Now, knowing how negotiators use their counterpart's deadlines to gain leverage

I suggest that it's best to keep your own deadlines secret. And that's the advice you'll get from most old-school negotiation experts. In his bestselling 1980 book, You Can Negotiate Anything, negotiation expert Herb Cohen tells the story of his first big business deal, when his company sent him to Japan to negotiate with a supplier. When he arrived, his counterparts asked him how long he was staying, and Cohen said a week. For the next seven days, his hosts proceeded to entertain him with parties, tours, and outings—everything but negotiation. In fact, Cohen's counterparts didn't start serious talks until he was about to leave, and the two sides hammered out the deal's final details in the car to the airport. Cohen landed in the United States with the sinking feeling that he'd been played, and that he had conceded too much under deadline pressure. Would he have told them his deadline in retrospect? No, Cohen says, because it gave them a tool he didn't have: "They knew my deadline, but I didn't know theirs." That mentality is everywhere these days. Seeing a simple rule to follow and assuming that a deadline is a strategic weakness, most negotiators follow Cohen's advice and hide their drop-dead date. Allow me to let you in on a little secret: Cohen, and the herd of negotiation "experts" who follow his lead, are wrong. Deadlines cut both ways. Cohen may well have been nervous about what his boss would say if he left Japan without an agreement. But it's also true that Cohen's counterparts wouldn't have won if he'd left without a deal. That's the key: When the negotiation is over for one side, it's over for the other too. In fact, Don A. Moore, a professor at the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley, says that hiding a deadline actually puts the negotiator in the worst possible position. In his research, he's found that hiding your deadlines dramatically increases the risk of an impasse. That's because having a deadline pushes you to speed up your concessions, but the other side, thinking that it has time, will just hold out for more. Imagine if when NBA owners set a lockout deadline during contract negotiations they didn't tell the players' union. They would concede and concede as the deadline approached, inciting the union to keep negotiating past the secret deadline. In that sense, hiding a deadline means you're negotiating with yourself, and you always lose when you do so. Moore discovered that when negotiators tell their counterparts about their deadline, they get better deals. It's true. First, by revealing your cutoff you reduce the risk of impasse. And second, when an opponent knows your deadline, he'll get to the real deal- and concession-making more quickly. I've got one final point to make before we move on: Deadlines are almost never ironclad. What's more important is engaging in the process and having a feel for how long that will take. You may see that you have more to accomplish than time will actually allow before the clock runs out. NO SUCH THING AS FAIR In the third week of my negotiations class, we play my favorite type of game, that is, the kind that shows my students how much they don't understand themselves (I know—I'm cruel). It's called the Ultimatum Game, and it goes like this: After the students split into pairs of a "proposer" and an "accepter," I give each proposer $10. The proposer then has to offer the accepter a round number of dollars. If the accepter agrees he or she receives what's been offered and the proposer gets the rest. If the accepter refuses the offer, neither of them get anything. In most versions of the game, the optimal offer is $1, since that maximizes the amount each player can potentially receive without guaranteeing a rejection. Yet in reality, proposers almost never make this logical offer. Why, I ask, did none of the proposers offer $1, which is the best rational offer for them and logically unrejectable for the accepter? And if they did and they got rejected—which happens—why did the accepter turn them down? "Anyone who made any offer other than $1 made an emotional choice," I say. "And for you accepters who turned down $1, since when is getting $0 better than getting $1? Did the rules of finance suddenly change?" This rocks my students' view of themselves as rational actors. But they're not. None of us are. We're all irrational, emotional. Emotion is a necessary element to decision making that we ignore at our own peril.

ve rational value of the money. This irrational reaction to unfairness extends all the way to serious economic deals. Remember Robin Williams' great work as the voice of the genie in Disney's Aladdin? Because he wanted to leave something wonderful behind for his kids, he said he did the voice for a cut-rate fee of $75,000, far below his usual $8 million payday. But then something happened: the movie became a huge hit, raking in $504 million. And Williams went ballistic. Now look at this with the Ultimatum Game in mind. Williams wasn't angry because of the money; it was the perceived unfairness that pissed him off. He didn't complain about his contract until Aladdin became a blockbuster, and then he and his agent went loud and long about how they got ripped off. Lucky for Williams, Disney wanted to keep its star happy. After initially pointing out the obvious—that he happily signed the deal—Disney made the dramatic gesture of sending the star a Picasso painting worth a reported $1 million. The nation of Iran was not so lucky. In recent years, Iran has put up with sanctions that have cost it well over $100 billion in foreign investment and oil revenue in order to defend a uranium-enriching nuclear program that can only meet 2 percent of its energy needs. In other words, like the students who won't take a free $1 because the offer seems insulting, Iran has screwed itself out of its chief source of income—oil and gas revenue—in order to pursue an energy project with little expected payoff. Why? Again, fairness. For Iran, it's not fair that the global powers—which together have several thousand nuclear weapons—should be able to decide if it can use nuclear energy. And why, Iran wonders, is it considered a pariah for enriching uranium when India and Pakistan, which clandestinely acquired nuclear weapons, are accepted members of the international community? In a TV interview, former Iranian nuclear negotiator Seyed Hossein Mousavian hit the nail on the head. "The nuclear issue today for Iranians is not nuclear," he said, "it's defending their integrity [as an] independent identity against the pressure of the rest." You may not trust Iran, but its moves are pretty clear evidence that rejecting perceived unfairness, even at substantial cost, is a powerful motivation. Once you understand what a messy, emotional, and destructive dynamic "fairness" can be, you can see why "Fair" is a tremendously powerful word that you need to use with care. In fact, of the three ways that people drop this F-bomb, only one is positive. The most common use is a judo-like defensive move that destabilizes the other side. This manipulation usually takes the form of something like, "We just want what's fair." Think back to the last time someone made this implicit accusation of unfairness to you, and I bet you'll have to admit that it immediately triggered feelings of defensiveness and discomfort. These feelings are often subconscious and often lead to an irrational concession. A friend of mine was selling her Boston home in a bust market a few years back. The offer she got was much lower than she wanted—it meant a big loss for her—and out of frustration, she used the "F" word. If you find yourself in this situation, the best reaction is to simply mirror the "F" that has just been lobbed at you. "Fair?" you'd respond, pausing to let the word's power do to them as it was intended to do to you. Follow that with a label: "It seems like you're ready to provide the evidence that supports that," which alludes to opening their books or otherwise handing over information that will either contradict their claim to fairness or give you more data to work with than you had previously. Right away, you declaw the attack. The last use of the F-word is my favorite because it's positive and constructive. It sets the stage for honest and empathetic negotiation. Here's how I use it: Early on in a negotiation, I say, "I want you to feel like you are being treated fairly at all times. So please stop me at any time if you feel I'm being unfair, and we'll address it." It's simple and clear and sets me up as an honest dealer. With that statement, I let people know it is okay to use that word with me if they use it honestly. As a negotiator, you should strive for a reputation of being fair. Your reputation precedes you. Let it precede you in a way that paves success. HOW TO DISCOVER THE EMOTIONAL DRIVERS BEHIND WHAT THE OTHER PARTY VALUES A few years ago, I stumbled upon the book How to Become a Rainmaker, and I like to review it occasionally to refresh my sense of the emotional drivers that fuel decisions. The book does a great job explaining the sales job not as a rational argument but as an emotional framing job. If you can get the other party to reveal their problems, pain, and unmet objectives—if you can get at what people are really buying—then you can sell them a vision of their problem that leaves your proposal as the perfect solution. Look at this from the most basic level. What does a good babysitter sell, really? It's not child care exactly, but a relaxed evening. A furnace salesperson? Cozy rooms for family time. A locksmith? A feeling of security. Know the emotional drivers and you can frame the benefits of any deal in language that will resonate. BEND THEIR REALITY Take the same person, change one or two variables, and $100 can be a glorious victory or a vicious insult. Recognizing this phenomenon lets you bend reality from insult to victory. Let me give you an example. I have this coffee mug, red and white with the Swiss flag. No chips, but used. What would you pay for it, deep down in your heart of hearts? You're probably going to say something like $3.50. Let's say it's your mug now. You're going to sell it to me. So tell me what it's worth. You're probably going to say something between $5 and $7. In both cases, it was the exact same mug. All I did was move the mug in relation to you, and I totally changed its value. Or imagine that I offer you $20 to run a three-minute errand and get me m

The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts.
Repair it into clean, readable English.
Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
e	a	cup	of	coffee.	You’re	going	to	think	to
yourself	that	$20	for	three	minutes	is	$400	an	hour.	You’re
going	to	be	thrilled.
What	if	then	you	find	out	that	by	getting	you	to	run	that
errand	 I	 made	 a	 million	 dollars.	 You’d	 go	 from	 being
ecstatic	 for	 making	 $400	 an	 hour	 to	 being	 angry	 because
you	got	ripped	off.
The	value	 of	the	$20,	just	like	the	value	of	the	coffee
mug,	 didn’t	 change.	 But	 your	 perspective	 of	 it	did.	 Just	 by
how	I	position	the	$20,	I	can	make	you	happy	or	disgusted
by	it.
I	 tell	 you	 that	 not	 to	 expose	 our	 decision	 making	 as
emotional	 and	 irrational.	 We’ve	 already	 seen	 that.	 What	 I
am	 saying	 is	 that	 while	 our	 decisions	 may	 be	 largely
irrational,	that	doesn’t	mean	there	aren’t	consistent	patterns,
principles,	 and	 rules	 behind	 how	 we	 act.	 And	 once	 you
know	 those	 mental	 patterns,	 you	 start	 to	 see	 ways	 to
influence	them.
By	far	the	best	theory	for	describing	the	principles	of	our
irrational	 decisions	 is	 something	 called	
Prospect	 Theory
.
Created	in	1979	by	the	psychologists	Daniel	Kahneman	andAmos	 Tversky,	 prospect	 theory	 describes	 how	 people
choose	 between	 options	 that	 involve	 risk,	 like	 in	 a
negotiation.	The	theory	argues	that	people	are	drawn	to	sure
things	 over	 probabilities,	 even	 when	 the	 probability	 is	 a
better	choice.	That’s	called	the	
Certainty	Effect
.	And	people
will	take	greater	risks	to	avoid	losses	than	to	achieve	gains.
That’s	why	 people	 who	 statistically	 have	 no	 need	 for
insurance	buy	it.	 Or	 consider	 this:	 a	 person	 who’s	 told	 he
has	a	 95	 percent	 chance	 of	 receiving	 $10,000	 or	 a	 100
percent	chance	of	getting	$9,499	will	usually	
avoid	risk	and
take	the	100	percent	chance.
2.	 LET	 THE	 OTHER	 GUY	 GO	 FIRST	 .	 .	 .	 MOST	 OF
the	TIME.
Now,	 it’s	 clear	 that	 the	 benefits	 of	 anchoring	 emotions	 are
great	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 bending	 your	 counterpart’s	 reality.
But	going	first	is	 not	 necessarily	the	 best	 thing	 when	 it
comes	to	negotiating	price.
When	the	famous	film	director	Billy	Wilder	went	to	hire
the	 famous	 detective	 novelist	 Raymond	 Chandler	 to	 write
the	 1944	 classic	
Double	 Indemnity
,	 Chandler	 was	 new	 to
Hollywood.	 But	 he	 came	 ready	 to	 negotiate,	 and	 in	 his
meeting	with	Wilder	and	the	movie’s	producer,	 Chandler
made	 the	 first	 salary	 offer:	 he	 bluffly	 demanded	 $150	 per
week	and	warned	Wilder	that	it	might	take	him	three	weeks
to	finish	the	project.
Wilder	 and	 the	 producer	 could	 barely	 stop	 from
laughing,	 because	 they	 had	 been	 planning	 to	 pay	 Chandler
$750	 per	 week	 and	 they	 knew	 that	 movie	 scripts	 took
months	 to	 write.	 Lucky	 for	 Chandler,	 Wilder	 and	 the

Text:

Erase
order. That’s because we focus on the first numbers and extrapolate.
That's not to say, "Never open." Rules like that are easy to remember, but, like most simplistic approaches, they are not always good advice. If you're dealing with a rookie counterpart, you might be tempted to be the shark and throw an extreme anchor. Or if you really know the market and you're dealing with an equally informed pro, you might offer a number just to make the negotiation go faster. Here's my personal advice on whether or not you want to be the shark that eats a rookie counterpart. Just remember, your reputation precedes you. I've run into CEOs whose reputation was to always badly beat their counterpart and pretty soon no one would deal with them. 3. ESTABLISH A RANGE While going first rarely helps, there is one way to seem to make an offer and bend their reality in the process. That is, by alluding to a range. What I mean is this: When confronted with naming your terms or price, counter by recalling a similar deal which establishes your "ballpark," albeit the best possible ballpark you wish to be in. Instead of saying, "I'm worth $110,000," Jerry might have said, "At top places like X Corp., people in this job get between $130,000 and $170,000." That gets your point across without moving the other party into a defensive position. And it gets them thinking at higher levels. Research shows that people who hear extreme anchors unconsciously adjust their expectations in the direction of the opening number. Many even go directly to their price limit. If Jerry had given this range, the firm probably would have offered $130,000 because it looked so cheap next to $170,000. In a recent study, 4 Columbia Business School psychologists found that job applicants who named a range received significantly higher overall salaries than those who offered a number, especially if their range was a "bolstering range," in which the low number in the range was what they actually wanted. Understand, if you offer a range (and it's a good idea to do so) expect them to come in at the low end. 4. PIVOT TO NONMONETARY TERMS People get hung up on "How much?" But don't deal with numbers in isolation. That leads to bargaining, a series of rigid positions defined by emotional views of fairness and pride. Negotiation is a more intricate and subtle dynamic. One of the easiest ways to bend your counterpart's reality to your point of view is by pivoting to nonmonetary terms. After you've anchored them high, you can make your offer seem reasonable by offering things that aren't important to you but could be important to them. Or if their offer is low, you could ask for things that matter more to you than them. Since this is sometimes difficult, what we often do is throw out examples to start the brainstorming process. Not long ago I did some training for the Memphis Bar Association. Normally, for the training they were looking for, I'd charge $25,000. But since learning that the ransom was just party money, I was aiming much lower: $5,000. We were not going to compromise. I advised him to start off by anchoring the conversation in the idea that he didn't have the money, but to do so without saying "No" so as not to hit their pride head-on. The kidnapper made another general threat against the aunt and again demanded the cash. That's when I had the nephew subtly question the fairness. "I'm sorry," the nephew responded, "but how are we supposed to pay if you're going to hurt her?" That brought up the aunt's death, which was the thing the kidnappers most wanted to avoid. They needed to keep her unharmed if they hoped to get any money. Not notice that to this point the nephew hadn't named a price. This game of attrition finally pushed the kidnappers to name a number first. Without prodding, they dropped to $50,000. Now that we had him in our sights, my colleagues and I told the nephew to stand his ground. "How can I come up with that kind of money?" we told him to ask. Again, the kidnapper dropped his demand, to $25,000. Now that we had him in our sights, my colleagues and I told the

really want the CD stereo felt there was no more money to be had, said yes. Six hours later, the family paid that sum and the aunt came back home safely. HOW TO NEGOTIATE A BETTER SALARY One of the critical factors in business school rankings is how well their graduates are compensated. So I tell every MBA class I lecture that my first objective is to single-handedly raise the ranking of their school by teaching them how to negotiate a better salary. I break down the process into three parts that blend this chapter's dynamics in a way that not only brings you better money, but convinces your boss to fight to get it for you. BE PLEASANTLY PERSISTENT ON NONSALARY TERMS Pleasant persistence is a kind of emotional anchoring that creates empathy with the boss and builds the right psychological environment for constructive discussion. And the more you talk about nonsalary terms, the more likely you are to hear the full range of their options. If they can't meet your nonsalary requests, they may even counter with more money, like they did with a French-born American former student of mine. She kept asking—with a big smile—for an extra week of vacation beyond what the company normally gave. She was "French," she said, and that's what French people did. The hiring company was completely handcuffed on the vacation issue, but because she was so darned delightful, and because she introduced a nonmonetary variable into the notion of her value, they countered by increasing her salary offer. SALARY TERMS WITHOUT SUCCESS TERMS IS RUSSIAN ROULETTE Once you've negotiated a salary, make sure to define success for your position—as well as metrics for your next raise. That's meaningful for you and free for your boss, much like giving me a magazine cover story was for the bar association. It gets you a planned raise and, by defining your success in relation to your boss's supervision, it leads into the next step. . SPARK THEIR INTEREST IN YOUR SUCCESS AND GAIN AN UNOFFICIAL MENTOR Remember the idea of figuring out what the other side is really buying? Well, when you are selling yourself to a manager, sell yourself as more than a body for a job; sell yourself, and your success, as a way they can validate their own intelligence and broadcast it to the rest of the company. Make sure they know you'll act as a flesh-and-blood argument for their importance. Once you've bent their reality to include you as their ambassador, they'll have a stake in your success. Ask: "What does it take to be successful here?" Please notice that this question is similar to questions that are suggested by many MBA career counseling centers, yet not exactly the same. And it's the exact wording of this question that's critical. Students from my MBA courses who have asked this question in job interviews have actually had interviewers lean forward and say, "No one ever asked us that before." The key issue here is if someone gives you guidance, they will watch to see if you follow their advice. They will have a personal stake in seeing you succeed. You've just recruited your first unofficial mentor. TO SHOW HOW THIS CAN BE DONE TO NEAR PERFECTION, I CAN THINK OF NO BETTER EXAMPLE THAN MY FORMER MBA STUDENT ANGEL PRADO. While Angel was finishing up his MBA, he went to his boss and began to lay the groundwork for his work post-MBA (which the company was paying). During his last semester, he set a nonspecific anchor—a kind of range—by suggesting to his boss that once he graduated and the company was done investing in his MBA (around $31,000 per year), that money should go to him as salary. His boss made no commitment, but Angel was pleasantly persistent about it, which set the idea as an anchor in his boss's mind. Upon graduation, Angel and his manager had their big sit-down. In an assertive and calm manner, Angel broached a nonfinancial issue and empathized with his situation (at the time the company was going through difficult negotiations with its investors). And then Angel courteously asked for a moment to step away and print up the agreed-upon job description. This pause created a dynamic of pre-deadline urgency in his boss, which Angel exploited when he returned with the printout. On the bottom, he'd added his desired compensation: " $134.5k - $143k." In that one little move, Angel weaved together a bunch of the lessons from this chapter. The odd numbers gave them the weight of thoughtful calculation. The numbers were high too, which exploited his boss's natural tendency to go directly to his price limit when faced by an extreme anchor. And they were a range, which made Angel seem less aggressive and the lower end more reasonable in comparison. From his boss's body language—raised eyebrows—it was clear that he was surprised by the compensation request. But it had the desired effect: after some comments about the description, he countered with $120,000. Angel didn't say "No" or "Yes," but kept talking and creating empathy. Then, in the middle of a sentence, seemingly out of the blue, his boss threw out $127,000. With his boss obviously negotiating with himself, Angel kept him going. Finally his boss said he agreed with the $134,500 and would pay that salary starting in three months, contingent on the board of directors' approval. As the icing on the cake, Angel worked in a positive use of the word "Fair" ( "That's fair," he said), and then sold the raise to his boss as a marriage in which his boss would be the mentor. "I'm asking you, not the board, for the promotion, and all I need is for you to agree with it," he said. And how did Angel's boss reply to his new ambassador? "I'll fight to get you this salary." So follow Angel's lead and make it rain! KEY LESSONS Compared to the tools discussed in previous chapters, the techniques here seem concrete and easy to use. But many people shy away from them because they seem manipulative. Something that bends your counterpart's reality must be cheating, right? In response, let me just say that these tools are used by all the best negotiators because they simply recognize the human psyche as it is. We are emotional, irrational beasts who are emotional and irrational in predictable, pattern-filled ways. Using that knowledge is only, well, rational. As you work these tools into your daily life, remember the following powerful lessons: ALL NEGOTIATIONS ARE DEFINED BY A NETWORK OF SUBTERREANEAN DESIRES AND NEEDS. DON'T LET YOURSELF BE FOOLED

by the surface. Once you know that the Haitian kidnappers just want party money, you will be miles better prepared. Splitting the difference is wearing one black and one brown shoe, so don't compromise. Meeting halfway often leads to bad deals for both sides. Approaching deadlines entice people to rush the negotiating process and do impulsive things that are against their best interests. The F-word—"Fair"—is an emotional term people usually exploit to put the other side on the defensive and gain concessions. When your counterpart drops the F-bomb, don't get suckered into a concession. Instead, ask them to explain how you're mistreating them. You can bend your counterpart's reality by anchoring his starting point. Before you make an offer, emotionally anchor them by saying how bad it will be. When you get to numbers, set an extreme anchor to make your "real" offer seem reasonable, or use a range to seem less aggressive. The real value of anything depends on what vantage point you're looking at it from. People will take more risks to avoid a loss than to realize a gain. Make sure your counterpart sees that there is something to lose by inaction. CHAPTER 7 CREATE THE ILLUSION OF CONTROL A month after I finished working the case of Jeffrey Schilling in May 2001, I got orders from headquarters to head back to Manila. The same bad guys who'd taken Schilling, a brutal group of radical Islamists named the Abu Sayyaf, had raided the Dos Palmas private diving resort and taken twenty hostages, including three Americans: Martin and Gracia Burnham, a missionary couple from Wichita, Kansas; and Guillermo Sobero, a guy who ran a California waterproofing firm. Dos Palmas was a negotiator's nightmare from the start. The day after the kidnappings, the recently elected Philippine president, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, set up the most confrontational, nonconstructive dynamic possible by publicly declaring "all-out war" on the Abu Sayyaf. Not exactly empathetic discourse, right? It got a lot worse. The Philippine army and marines had a turf war in the midst of the negotiations, pissing off the kidnappers with several botched raids. Because American hostages were involved, the CIA, the FBI, and U.S. military intelligence were all called in and we too squabbled among ourselves. Then the kidnappers raped and killed several hostages, 9/11 happened, and the Abu Sayyaf was linked to Al Qaeda. By the time the crisis concluded in an orgy of gunshots in June 2002, Dos Palmas had officially become the biggest failure in my professional life. To call it a train wreck would be generous, if you know what I mean. But failures plant the seeds of future success, and our failure in the Philippines was no exception. If the Dos Palmas calamity showed me anything, it was that we all were still suffering under the notion that negotiation was a wrestling match where the point is to exhaust your opponent into submission, hope for the best, and never back down. As my disappointment with Dos Palmas forced me to reckon with our failed techniques, I took a deep look into the newest negotiating theories—some great and some completely harebrained—and had a chance encounter with a case in Pittsburgh that completely changed how I looked at the interpersonal dynamics of negotiation conversations. From the ashes of Dos Palmas, then, we learned a lesson that would forever change how the FBI negotiated kidnappings. We learned that negotiation was coaxing, not overcoming; co-opting, not defeating. Most important, we learned that successful negotiation involved getting your counterpart to see things from your perspective and making them feel like they had a choice in the matter.

like that, it's often seen as a sign of weakness. You don't want to be giving away information about your hostages unless you absolutely have to. And the kidnappers know this. So they're often reluctant to give you proof of life. They may just tell you what they think you want to hear, which could lead you down the wrong path.

The other problem is that these questions are not very effective at proving that a hostage is alive. If a kidnapper really wants to mislead you, it's relatively easy for them to come up with an answer. It's also pretty easy to fake a recording of someone giving an answer to one of these questions.

So why do we use them? Well, there are a few reasons. One is that they provide a kind of psychological comfort. When you're dealing with hostage situations, every piece of information counts. If you can get the kidnapper to give you some information about your hostage, it's like getting a small victory. It gives you hope and helps keep you going.

Another reason is that they can sometimes be a useful tool for negotiating. If you can get the kidnapper to agree to answer one of these questions, it might be a sign that they are starting to trust you. And if they trust you, they might be more likely to agree to other things.

But overall, I think we need to find new ways to communicate with our counterparts in these situations. We can't keep relying on the same old tactics that haven't worked for years. We need to be creative and try new things if we want to save lives.

The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts.
Repair it into clean, readable English.
Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
of	that	type,	it’s	a	near	certainty	that
the	 cops	 are	 coaching	 them.	 And	 that	 makes	 kidnappers
very	nervous.
Even	 beyond	 the	 nerves,	 you	 had	 the	 problem	 that
answering	 questions	 like	 those	 required	 little,	 if	 any,	 effort.
The	 bad	 guys	 go	 and	 get	 the	 fact	 and	 give	 it	 to	 you	 right
away,	because	it’s	so	easy.	Bang,	bang,	bang!	It	happens	so
fast	 that	 you	 didn’t	gain	 any	 tactical	 advantage,	 any	 usableinformation,	 any	 effort	 on	 their	 part	 toward	 a	 goal	 that
serves	you.	And	 all	 negotiation,	 done	 well,	 should	 be	 an
information-gathering	process	that	vests	your	counterpart	in
an	outcome	that	serves	you.
Worst	of	all,	the	bad	guys	know	that	they	have	just	given
you	 something—a	 proof	 of	 life—which	 triggers	 this	 whole
human	reciprocity	gene.	Whether	we	like	to	recognize	it	or
not,	a	universal	rule	of	human	nature,	across	all	cultures,	is
that	when	 somebody	 gives	 you	 something,	 they	 expect
something	in	return.	And	they	won’t	give	anything	else	until
you	pay	them	back.
Now,	 we	 didn’t	 want	 to	 trigger	 this	 whole	 reciprocity
thing	 because	we	didn’t	want	 to	 give	 anything.	 So	 what
happened?	All	of	our	conversations	became	these	paralyzed
confrontations	 between	 two	 parties	 who	 wanted	 to	 extract
something	 from	 each	 other	 but	 didn’t	 want	 to	 give.	 We
didn’t	communicate,	out	of	pride	and	fear.
That’s	why	we	failed,	while	numbskulls	like	this	crooked
Philippine	 politician	 just	 stumbled	 in	 and	 got	 what	 we	 so
desperately	 needed.	 That	 is,	 communication	 without
reciprocity.	I	sat	back	and	wondered	to	myself,	How	the	hell
do	
we
	do	that?
SUSPEND	UNBELIEF
While	 I	 was	 racking	 my	 brains	 over	 how	 this	 sleazy
politician	 managed	 to	 get	 Martin	 Burnham	 on	 the	 phone
while	 we	 never	 could,	 FBI	 Pittsburgh	 had	 a	 kidnapping
case. /******/My	 partner	 Chuck	 brought	 me	 the	 tapes	 from	 the	 case
because	 he	 thought	 it	 was	 funny.	You	 see,	 one	 Pittsburgh
drug	 dealer	 had	 kidnapped	 the	 girlfriend	 of	 another	 drug
dealer,	 and	 was	 making	 a	 move	 to	 leave	 because	 he	 was
tired	of	waiting.
Just	 then	 a	 senior	 physician	 arrived.	 After	 calmly
offering	the	patient	a	glass	of	water	and	asking	if	they	could
chat	for	a	minute,	he	said	he	understood	why	the	patient	was
pissed	off	and	promised	to	call	the	lab	to	see	why	the	results
were	delayed.
But	 what	 he	 did	 next	 is	 what	 really	 suspended	 the
patient’s	 unbelief:	 he	 asked	 a	 calibrated	 question—what	 he
felt	 was	 so	 important	 about	 leaving—and	 then	 when	 the
patient	 said	 he	 had	 errands	 to	 handle,	 the	 doctor	 offered	 to
connect	the	 patient	with	services	that	 could	 help	 him	 get
them	done.	And,	boom,	the	patient	volunteered	to	stay.
What’s	 so	 powerful	 about	 the	 senior	 doctor’s	 technique
is	that	he	took	what	was	a	showdown—“I’m	going	to	leave”
versus	“You	can’t	leave”—and	asked	questions	that	led	the
patient	to	solve	his	own	problem	.	.	.	in	the	way	the	doctor
apped.	It	was	still	a	kind	of	showdown,	of	course,	but	the	doctor
took	 the	confrontation	 and	 bravado	 out	 of	 it	 by	 giving	 the
patient	 the	 illusion	 of	 control.	 As	 an	 old	
Washington	 Post
editor	 named	 Robert	 Estabrook	
once	 said,	 “He	 who	 has
learned	to	disagree	without	being	disagreeable	has
discovered	the	most	valuable	secret	of	negotiation.”
This	 same	 technique	 for	 suspending	 unbelief	 that	 you
use	with	kidnappers	and	 escaping	 patients	 works	 for
anything,	even	negotiating	prices.	When	you	go	into	a	store,
instead	 of	telling	 the	salesclerk	what	 you	 “need,”	 you	 can
describe	what	you’re	looking	for	and	ask	for	suggestions.
Then,	once	you’ve	picked	out	what	you	want,	instead	of
hitting	them	with	a	hard	offer,	you	can	just	say	the	price	is	a
bit	more	than	you	budgeted	and	ask	for	help	with	one	of	the
greatest-of-all-time	 calibrated	 questions:	 “How	 am	 I
supposed	to	 do	 that?”	The	 critical	 part	 of	 this	 approach	 is
that	 you	 really	 are	 asking	 for	 help	 and	 your	 delivery	 must
convey	 that.	 With	 this	 negotiating	 scheme,	 instead	 of
bullying

The clerk, you're asking for their advice and giving them the illusion of control. Asking for help in this manner, after already being engaged in a dialogue, is an incredibly powerful negotiating technique for transforming encounters from confrontational showdowns into joint problem-solving sessions. Calibrated questions are the best tool.

A few years ago, I was consulting with a client who had a small firm that did public relations for a large corporation. The folks at the big company were not paying their bills, and as time went on, they owed my client more and more money. They kept her on the hook by promising lots of repeat business, implying that she would get a pile of revenue if she just kept working. She felt trapped.

My advice for her was simple: I told her to engage them in a conversation where she summarized the situation and then asked, "How am I supposed to do that?" She shook her head. No way. The idea of having to ask this question just terrified her. "If they tell me I have to, then I'm trapped!" was her reaction.

She also heard the question as "You're screwing me out of money and it has to stop." That sounded like the first step to her getting fired as a consultant. I explained to her that this implication, though real, was in her mind. Her client would hear the words and not the implication as long as she kept calm and avoided making it sound by her delivery like an accusation or threat. As long as she stayed cool, they would hear it as a problem to be solved.

She didn't quite believe me. We walked through the script several times, but she was still afraid. Then a few days later, she called me, totally giddy with happiness. The client had called with another request and she had finally gotten up the courage to summarize the situation, and ask, "How am I supposed to do that?" And you know what? The answer she got was "You're right, you can't and I apologize." Her client explained that they were going through some internal problems, but she was given a new accounting contact and told she'd be paid within forty-eight hours. She was.

Now, think about how my client's question worked: without accusing them of anything, it pushed the big company to understand her problem and offer the solution she wanted. That in a nutshell is the whole point of open-ended questions that are calibrated for a specific effect.

Before, the secret to gaining the upper hand in a negotiation is giving the other side the illusion of control. That's why calibrated questions are ingenious: Calibrated questions make your counterpart feel like they're in charge, but it's really you who is framing the conversation. Your counterpart will have no idea how constrained they are by your questions.

Once I was negotiating with one of my FBI bosses about attending a Harvard executive program. He had already approved the expenditure for the travel, but on the day before I was supposed to leave, he called me into his office and began to question the validity of the trip. I knew him well enough to know that he was trying to show me that he was in charge. So after we talked for a while, I looked at him and asked, "When you originally approved this trip, what did you have in mind?"
He visibly relaxed as he sat back in his chair and brought the top of his fingers and thumbs together in the shape of a steeple. Generally, this is a body language that means the person feels superior and in charge. "Listen," he said, "just make sure you brief everyone when you get back."
That question, calibrated to acknowledge his power and nudge him toward explaining himself, gave him the illusion of control. And it got me just what I wanted.

Let's pause for a minute here, because there's one vitally important thing you have to remember when you enter a negotiation armed with your list of calibrated questions: Without self-control and emotional regulation, it doesn't work. The very first thing I talk about when I'm training new negotiators is the critical importance of self-control. If you can't control your own emotions, how can you expect to influence the emotions of another party?

To show you what I mean, let me tell you a story. Not long ago, a freelance marketing strategist came to me with a problem. One of her clients had hired a new CEO, a penny pincher whose strategy was to cut costs by offshoring everything he could. He was also a male chauvinist who didn't like the assertive style in which the strategist, a woman, conducted herself.
Immediately my client and the CEO started to go at each other on conference calls in that passive-aggressive way that is ever present in corporate America. After a few weeks of this, my client decided she had had enough and invoiced the CEO for the last bit of work she had done (about $7,000) and politely said that the arrangement wasn't working out. The CEO answered by saying the bill was too high, that he would pay half of it and that they would talk about the rest.
After that, he stopped answering her calls.
The underlying dynamic was that this guy didn't like being questioned by anyone, especially a woman. So she and I developed a strategy that showed him she understood where she went wrong and acknowledged his power, while at the same time directing his energy toward solving her problem.

The script we came up with hit all the best practices of negotiation we've talked about so far. Here it is by steps:
1. A "No"-oriented email question to reinitiate contact: "Have you given up on settling this amicably?"
2. A statement that leaves only the answer of "That's right" to form a dynamic of agreement: "It seems that you feel my bill is not justified."
3. Calibrated questions about the problem to get him to reveal his thinking: "How does this bill violate our agreement?"
4. More "No"-oriented questions to remove unspoken barriers: "Are you saying I misled you?" "Are you saying I didn't do as you asked?" "Are you saying I reneged on our agreement?" Or "Are you saying I failed you?"
5. Labeling and mirroring the essence of his answers if they are not acceptable so he has to consider them again: (No response needed)
6. The basic issue here is that when people feel that they are not in control, they adopt what psychologists call a hostage mentality. That is, in moments of conflict they react to their lack of power by either becoming extremely defensive or lashing out. Neurologically, in situations like this the fight-or-flight mechanism in the reptilian brain or the emotions in the limbic system overwhelm the rational part of our mind, the neocortex, leading us to overreact in an impulsive, instinctive way. In a negotiation, like the one between my client and the CEO, this always produces a negative outcome. So we have to train our neocortex to override the emotions from the other two brains. That means biting your tongue and learning how to mindfully change your state to something more positive. And it means lowering the hostage mentality in your counterpart by asking a question or even offering an apology. (No response needed)

"There's always a team on the other side. If you are not influencing those behind the table, you are vulnerable." A few years ago in St. Martin Parish, Louisiana, a group of inmates armed with makeshift knives took the warden and some of his staff hostage. The situation was especially nerve-wracking because the prisoners were both tense and disorganized, which meant anything could happen.
The negotiators sensed that, beneath the bluster, the prisoners didn't really want to hurt the staff. They knew that they felt backed into a corner and, more than anything, they wanted the situation to end.
But there was a stumbling block: the inmates were afraid that the prisoners who gave up after taking correctional officers hostage, not to mention the warden, would end up beaten and badly.
So the negotiators delivered a pair of walkie-talkies to the inmates and designed this elaborate surrender ritual to get the hostage-takers to end the siege. The idea was elegantly simple:
The inmates would send out one of their guys with a walkie-talkie, and he'd walk past the three perimeters of combined multiagency law enforcement that were stationed outside the prison. Once he'd walked past the final perimeter, he'd get into the paddy wagon and be transferred to jail. There, he'd use the walkie-talkie to call the guys back in the prison and say, essentially, "They didn't kick my ass." And they'd know it was okay to come out just like he did, one at a time.
After some haggling, the inmates agreed with the plan and the first inmate comes out. It starts off great. He walks past the federal zone, then the SWAT zone, and then he makes it to the outer perimeter. But just as he's about to climb into the paddy wagon, some guy sees the walkie-talkie and says, "What the hell are you doing with that?" and confiscates it before sending the guy off to jail.
The inmates back in the prison start to freak out because their buddy hasn't called. The one with the other walkie-talkie calls the negotiators and starts yelling, "Why didn't he call? They're kicking his ass. We told you!" He starts talking about cutting off a hostage's finger, just to make sure the negotiators know the inmates are for real.
Now it's the negotiators who are freaking out. They sprint to the perimeter and start screaming at everyone. It's life and death at stake. Or at least an amputated finger. Finally, fifteen nail-biting minutes later, this SWAT guy comes striding up, all proud of himself. "Some idiot gave this dude a radio," he says, and sort of smiles as he hands the negotiators the walkie-talkie. The negotiators barely stop themselves from slugging the guy before they tear off to the jail to have the first inmate call in.
The point here is that your job as a negotiator isn't just to get to an agreement. It's getting to one that can be implemented and making sure that happens. Negotiators have to be decision architects: they have to dynamically and adaptively design the verbal and nonverbal elements of the negotiation to gain both consent and execution.
"Yes" is nothing without "How." While an agreement is nice, a contract is better, and a signed check is best. You don't get your profits with the agreement. They come upon implementation. Success isn't the hostage-taker saying, "Yes, we have a deal"; success comes afterward, when the freed hostage says to your face, "Thank you."
In this chapter, I'll show how to drive toward and achieve consent, both with those at the negotiating table and with the invisible forces "underneath" it; distinguish true buy-in from fake acquiescence; and guarantee execution using the Rule of Three.
"Yes" is nothing without "How." While an agreement is nice, a contract is better, and a signed check is best. You don't get your profits with the agreement. They come upon implementation.

Just remember,” Julie said, “no matter what happens, I love you.”
“Don’t worry. I'll be fine,” José answered. And then he and his captors disappeared into the jungle. The captors wanted $5 million. We wanted to buy time. Ever since the Dos Palmas debacle and the Pittsburgh epiphany, I had been raring to employ the lessons we’d learned about calibrated questions. So when José was kidnapped, I sent my guys down to Ecuador and told them that we had a new strategy. The kidnapping would provide an opportunity to prove this approach.
“All we're going to say is, ‘Hey, how do we know José is okay? How are we supposed to pay until we know José is okay?’ Again and again,” I told them. Although they were queasy about untested techniques, my guys were game. The local cops were livid, though, because they always did proof of life the old-fashioned way (which the FBI had taught them in the first place). Luckily Julie was with us 100 percent because she saw how the calibrated questions would stall for time, and she was convinced that with enough time her husband would find a way to get home.
The day after the kidnapping, the rebels marched José into the mountains along the Colombian border and settled in a cabin high in the jungle. There José built a rapport with the kidnappers to make himself harder for them to kill. He impressed them with his knowledge of the jungle and, with a black belt in karate, he filled the time by teaching them martial arts.
My negotiators coached Julie every day as we waited for contact from the rebels. We learned later that the designated negotiator from José’s captors had to walk to town to negotiate by phone. My guys told Julie to answer every one of the kidnappers’ demands with a question. My strategy was to keep the kidnappers engaged but off balance.
“How do I know José is alive?” she asked the first time they talked. To their demand for $5 million, she said, “We don't have that kind of money. How can we raise that much?” “How can we pay you anything until we know José is okay?” Julie asked the next time they talked. Questions, always questions.
The kidnapper who was negotiating with Julie seemed extremely perplexed by her persistent questions, and he kept asking for time to think. That slowed everything down, but he never got angry with Julie. Answering questions gave him the illusion that he had control of the negotiation. By constantly asking questions and making minuscule offers, Julie drove the ransom down to $16,500. When they came to that number, the kidnappers demanded she get it to them immediately.
“How can I do that when I have to sell my cars and trucks?” she asked. Always buying more time. We were starting to grin because success was within reach; we were really close to a ransom that the family could afford. And then I got a phone call in the middle of the night from one of my deployed guys in Ecuador, Kevin Rust. Kevin is a terrific negotiator and the same guy who’d called a year earlier to tell me Martin Burnham had been killed. My stomach tied into a knot when I heard his voice.
“We just got a call from José,” Kevin said. “He's still in guerrilla territory but he escaped and he's on a bus and he's making his way back.” As Julie did, the first and most common "No" question you’ll use is some version of "How am I supposed to do that?" (for example, "How can we raise that much?"). Your tone of voice is critical as this phrase can be delivered as either an accusation or a request for assistance. So pay attention to your voice. This question tends to have the positive effect of making the other side take a good look at your situation. This positive dynamic is what I refer to as "forced empathy," and it's especially effective if leading up to it you’ve already been empathic with your counterpart. This engages the dynamic of reciprocity to lead them to do something for you. Starting with José's kidnapping, "How am I supposed to do that?" became our primary response to a kidnapper demanding a ransom. And we never had it backfire. Once I was working with an accounting consultant named Kelly who was owed a pile of money by a corporate client. She kept consulting because she believed she was developing a useful contact, and because the promise of a future payday seemed to justify continuing in good faith. But at a certain point, Kelly was so far behind on her own bills that she was in a bind. She couldn't continue to work with only a vague idea of when she'd get paid, but she worried that if she pushed too hard she wouldn't get paid at all. I told her to wait until the client asked for more work, because if she made a firm payment demand right away she would be vulnerable if they refused. Luckily for Kelly, the client soon called to ask her for more work. Once he finished his request, she calmly asked a "How" question:
"I'd love to help," she said, "but how am I supposed to do that?" By indicating her willingness to work but asking for help finding a way to do so, she left her deadbeat customer with no choice but to put her needs ahead of everything else. And she got paid. Besides saying "No," the other key benefit of asking "How" questions is, quite literally, that it forces your counterpart to consider and explain how a deal will be implemented. A deal is nothing without good implementation. Poor implementation is the cancer that eats your profits. By making your counterparts articulate implementation in their own words, your carefully calibrated "How" questions will convince them that the final solution is their idea. And that's crucial.

People always make more effort to implement a solution when they think it's theirs. That is simply human nature. That's why negotiation is often called "the art of letting someone else have your way."

There are two key questions you can ask to push your counterparts to think they are defining success their own way: "How will we know if we're on track?" and "How will we address things if we find out we're off track?" When they answer, you summarize their answers until you get a "That's right." Then you'll know they've bought in.

On the flip side, be wary of two telling signs that your counterpart doesn't believe the idea is theirs. As I've noted, when they say, "You're right," it's often a good indicator they are not vested in what is being discussed. And when you push for implementation and they say, "I'll try," you should get a sinking feeling in your stomach. Because this really means, "I plan to fail."

When you hear either of these, dive back in with calibrated "How" questions until they define the terms of successful implementation in their own voice. Follow up by summarizing what they have said to get a "That's right." Let the other side feel victory. Let them think it was their idea. Subsume your ego. Remember: "Yes" is nothing without "How." So keep asking "How?" And succeed.

Influencing Those Behind the Table

A few weeks after José got back to the United States, I drove to his family's place in upstate New York. I was thrilled when José escaped, but the case left me with one nagging worry: Had my new strategy failed? You see, José had gotten home safely, but not because we'd negotiated his release. I worried that our winning had less to do with our brilliant strategy than with dumb luck.

After being greeted warmly by Julie and her parents, José and I grabbed some coffee and sat down. I'd gone there to do what CNU referred to as a hostage survival debriefing. I was after insights into how to better advise people facing potential kidnappings, not just physically, but psychologically. I was also burning to find out what had occurred behind the scenes because it seemed as if my new strategy hadn't worked.

Finally, the conversation came around to our use of calibrated questions. "You know what?" he said. "The craziest thing was that their negotiator was supposed to stay in town and negotiate the deal, but because Julie kept asking him questions he didn't really know for sure how to answer, he kept coming out to the jungle. They all would get together and have a huge discussion about how to respond. They even thought about taking me into town and putting me on the phone because Julie was so persistent with asking if I was okay."

Right then I knew we had the right tool. It was exactly the opposite of the Burnham case, where our negotiator cut the deal with one of the guys and then the rest of them took the $300,000 and said, "No, we're not doing that." Causing the other side to work that hard and forcing that much internal coordination in service of our own goals was unprecedented.

Our negotiating strategy in Ecuador worked not just because the questions contributed to the environment that let José escape, but because they made sure the kidnappers—our counterparts—were all on the same page. Yes, few hostage-takers—and few business deal makers—fly solo. But for the most part, there are almost always other players, people who can act as deal makers or deal killers. If you truly want to get to "Yes" and get your deal implemented, you have to discover how to affect these individuals.

When implementation happens by committee, the support of that committee is key. You always have to identify and unearth their motivations, even if you haven't yet identified each individual on that committee. That can be easy as asking a few calibrated questions, like: How does this affect everybody else? How on board is the rest of your team? How do we make sure that we deliver the right material to the right people? How do we ensure the managers of those we're training are fully on board? If we had asked questions like that, the CEO and HR head would have checked with this guy, maybe even brought him into the conversation. And saved us all a lot of pain.

Spotting Liars, Dealing With Jerks, and Charming Everyone Else

As a negotiator, you're going to run into guys who lie to your face and try to scare you into agreement. Aggressive jerks and serial fabricators come with the territory, and dealing with them is something you have to do. But learning how to handle aggression and identify falsehood is just part of a larger issue: learning how to spot and interpret the subtleties of communication—both verbal and nonverbal—that reveal the mental states of your counterparts.

Truly effective negotiators are conscious of the verbal, paraverbal (how it's said), and nonverbal aspects of communication. They pay attention to tone, body language, facial expressions, and other subtle cues that can give away a person's true intentions or feelings about a particular topic. By being attuned to these subtleties, effective negotiators can better understand their counterparts' motivations and needs, which can help them craft more compelling arguments and offers.

In addition to observing verbal and nonverbal cues, effective negotiators also actively listen to what their counterparts are saying. They ask open-ended questions that encourage their counterparts to share more information about their goals, concerns, and priorities. By truly listening and understanding the other person's perspective, effective negotiators can build trust, rapport, and mutual respect—all of which are crucial components of successful negotiation.

Ultimately, being a great negotiator requires a combination of skills: the ability to ask the right questions, actively listen to the answers, observe and interpret communication subtleties, and adapt your approach based on what you learn about the other person's needs and priorities. By honing these skills, you can become a more effective negotiator who can navigate even the most challenging situations with confidence and success.

communications that pervade negotiations and group dynamics. And they know how to employ those subtleties to their benefit. Even changing a single word when you present options—like using "not lose" instead of "keep"—can unconsciously influence the conscious choices your counterpart makes. Here, I want to talk about the tools you need to ID liars, disarm jerks, and charm everybody else. Of course, the open-ended "How" question is one of them—maybe the most important one—but there are many more.

Alastair Onglingswan was living in the Philippines when, one evening in 2004, he hailed a taxi and settled in for a long ride home from Manila’s Greenhills shopping center. He dozed off. And he woke up in chains. Unfortunately for Alastair, the cabbie had a second business as a kidnapper. He kept a bottle of ether in his front seat, and when a target fell asleep he would drug him, imprison him, and ask for ransom.

Within hours, the kidnapper used Alastair’s phone to contact his girlfriend in New York. He demanded a daily payment to "take care" of Alastair while he researched the family’s wealth.

"It's okay if you don't pay," he said. "I can always sell his organs in Saudi Arabia." Within twenty-four hours, I'd been charged with heading the negotiation from Quantico. Alastair's girlfriend was too nervous to handle the family side of the negotiation, and his mother, who lived in the Philippines, just wanted to accept any demand the kidnapper made.

But Alastair’s brother Aaron, in Manila, was different: he just got the idea of negotiation and accepted that Alastair might die, which would make him a better and more effective negotiator. Aaron and I set up an always-on phone line, and I became Aaron's guru on the other side of the world.

Through the kidnapper’s comments and demands, I saw that he was experienced and patient. As a token of his intentions, he offered to cut off one of Alastair’s ears and send it to the family along with a video of him severing the ear.

The demand for the daily payment was clearly a trick to quickly drain the family of as much money as possible while at the same time gauging their wealth. We had to figure out who this guy was—Was he a lone operator or part of a group? Did he plan on killing Alastair or not?—and we had to do that before the family went broke. To get there, we were going to have to engage the kidnapper in a protracted negotiation. We were going to have to slow everything down.

From Quantico, I loaded Aaron up with calibrated questions. I instructed him to keep peppering the violent jerk with "How?" How am I supposed to . . .? How do we know . . . . ? How can we . . . . ? There is great power in treating jerks with deference. It gives you the ability to be extremely assertive—to say “No”—in a hidden fashion.

"How do we know if we pay you that you won't hurt Alastair?" Aaron asked. In the Chinese martial art of tai chi, the goal is to use your opponent’s aggressiveness against him—to turn his offense into your way to defeat him. That’s the approach we took with Alastair’s kidnapper: we wanted to absorb his threats and wear him down.

Over time the kidnapper had become unguarded about spending time on the phone with his "friend." Finally, the Philippine National Police investigators tracked the phone to a house and raided it. The kidnapper and Alastair were not there, but the kidnapper’s wife was. She told the police about another house they owned. The police quickly raided the other house, freed Alastair, and arrested the kidnapper.

There are plenty of other tactics, tools, and methods for using subtle verbal and nonverbal forms of communication to understand and modify the mental states of your counterpart. As I run through some of them here, I want you to take a moment to internalize each one.

These are the kind of tools that can help observant negotiators hit home runs. And now, let's move on to the next rule...

THE 7-38-55 PERCENT RULE In two famous studies on what makes us like or dislike somebody, UCLA psychology professor Albert Mehrabian created the 7-38-55 rule. That is, only 7 percent of a message is based on the words while 38 percent comes from the tone of voice and 55 percent from the speaker’s body language and face.

While these figures mainly relate to situations where we are forming an attitude about somebody, the rule nonetheless offers a useful ratio for negotiators. You see, body language and tone of voice—not words—are our most powerful assessment tools. That’s why I'll often fly great distances to meet someone face-to-face, even when I can say much of what needs to be said over the phone.

So how do you use this rule? First, pay very close attention to tone and body language to make sure they match up with the literal meaning of the words. If they don’t align, it's quite possible that the speaker is lying or at least unconvinced. When someone’s tone of voice or body language does not align with the meaning of the words they say, use labels to discover the source of the incongruence.

Here’s an example:
You: “So we're agreed?”
Them: “Yes . . .”
You: “I heard you say, ‘Yes,’ but it seemed like there was hesitation in your voice.”
Them: “Oh, it's nothing really.”
You: “No, this is important, let's make sure we get this right.”
Them: “Thanks, I appreciate it.”
This is the way to make sure your agreement gets implemented with no surprises. And your counterpart will be grateful. Your act of recognizing the incongruence and gently dealing with it through a label will make them feel respected. Consequently, your relationship of trust will be improved.

Any pushy salesman tries to trap their clients into saying "Yes" that many people get very good at. One great tool for avoiding this trap is the Rule of Three. The Rule of Three is simply getting the other guy to agree to the same thing three times in the same conversation. It’s tripling the strength of whatever dynamic you're trying to drill into them at the moment. In doing so, it uncovers problems before they happen. It's really hard to repeatedly lie or fake conviction.
When I first learned this skill, my biggest fear was how to avoid sounding like a broken record or coming off as really pushy. The answer, I learned, is to vary your tactics. The first time they agree to something or give you a commitment, that's No. 1. For No. 2, you might label or summarize what they said so they answer, "That's right." And No. 3 could be a calibrated "How" or "What" question about implementation that asks them to explain what will constitute success, something like "What do we do if we get off track?"
Or the three times might just be the same calibrated question phrased three different ways, like "What's the biggest challenge you faced? What are we up against here? What do you see as being the most difficult thing to get around?" Either way, going at the same issue three times uncovers falsehoods as well as the incongruences between words and body language we mentioned in the last section. So next time you're not sure your counterpart is truthful and committed, try it.
The Pinocchio Effect With Carlo Collodi's famous character Pinocchio, it was easy to tell when he was lying: you just had to watch the nose. It turns out that Collodi wasn't far off reality. Most people offer obvious telltale signs when they're lying. Not a growing nose, but close enough. In a study of the components of lying, Harvard Business School professor Deepak Malhotra and his coauthors found that, on average, liars use more words than truth tellers and use far more third-person pronouns. They start talking about him, her, it, one, they, and their rather than I, in order to put some distance between themselves and the lie. And they discovered that liars tend to speak in more complex sentences in an attempt to win over their suspicious counterparts. It's what W.C. Fields meant when he talked about baffling someone with bullshit. The researchers dubbed this the Pinocchio Effect because, just like Pinocchio's nose, the number of words grew along with the lie. People who are lying are, understandably, more worried about being believed, so they work harder--too hard, as it were--at being believable.
Pay Attention to Their Usage of Pronouns The use of pronouns by a counterpart can also help give you a feel for their actual importance in the decision and implementation chains on the other side of the table. The more in love they are with "I," "me," and "my" the less important they are. Conversely, the harder it is to get a first-person pronoun out of a negotiator's mouth, the more important they are. Just like in the Malhotra study where the liar is distancing himself from the lie, in a negotiation, smart decision makers don't want to be cornered at the table into making a decision. They will defer to the people who've been standing next to them and offering to buy them a drink. Humanize yourself. Use your name to introduce yourself. Say it in a fun, friendly way. Let them enjoy the interaction, too. And get your own special price.
How To Get Your Counterparts to Bid Against Themselves Like you saw Aaron and Julie do with their kidnappers, the best way to get your counterparts to lower their demands is to say "No" using "How" questions. These indirect ways of saying "No" won't shut down your counterpart the way a blunt, pride-piercing "No" would. In fact, these responses will sound so much like counterbids that your counterparts will often keep bidding against themselves. We've found that you can usually express "No" four times before actually saying the word. The first step in the "No" series is the old standby: "How am I supposed to do that?" You have to deliver it in a deferential way, so it becomes a request for help. Properly delivered, it invites the other side to participate in your dilemma and solve it with a better offer. After that, some version of "Your offer is very generous, I'm sorry, that just doesn't work for me" is an elegant second way to say "No." This well-tested response avoids making a counteroffer, and the use of "generous" nurtures your counterpart to live up to the word. The "I'm sorry" also softens the "No" and builds empathy. (You can ignore the so-called negot

The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts.
Repair it into clean, readable English.
Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
itinating
experts who say apologies are always signs of weakness.)
Then you can use something like “I’m sorry but I’m afraid I just can’t do that.” It’s a little more direct, and the “can’t do that” does great double duty. By expressing an inability to perform, it can trigger the other side’s empathy towards you.
“I’m sorry, no” is a slightly more succinct version for the fourth “No.” If delivered gently, it barely sounds negative at all.
If you have to go further, of course, “No” is the last and most direct way. Verbally, it should be delivered with a downward inflection and a tone of regard; it’s not meant to be “NO!”
One of my students, a guy named Jesus Bueno, wrote me not long ago to tell me an amazing story about how he’d used the multi-step “No” to help his brother Joaquin out of a sticky business situation.
His brother and two friends had bought a cannabis grow shop franchise in northern Spain, where the cultivation of marijuana for personal use is legal. Joaquin and his partner, Bruno, each invested 20,000 euros in the business for a 46 percent stake (a minority partner invested another €3,500 for 8 percent).
From the beginning, Joaquin and Bruno had a rocky relationship. Joaquin is an excellent salesman, while Bruno was more of a bookkeeper. The minority partner was also an excellent salesman, and he and Joaquin believed that growing sales was the correct strategy. That meant offering discounts for large orders and repeat customers, which Bruno disagreed with. Their planned spending on launching a website and expanding inventory also rubbed Bruno the wrong way.
Then Bruno’s wife became a problem as she started nagging Joaquin about how he shouldn’t spend so much on expansion and instead take more profits. One day, Joaquin was reviewing inventory purchases and noticed that some items they had ordered had not been placed on the store’s shelves. He began searching for them online and to his surprise found an eBay store set up with the wife’s first name that was selling exactly those missing products.
This started a huge argument between Bruno and Joaquin, and soured their relationship. In the heat of the moment, Bruno told Joaquin that he was open to selling his shares because he felt the business risks they were taking were too large. So Joaquin consulted with his brother: my student Jesus.
Because they believed that pressure from Bruno’s wife was why he wanted to sell, Jesus helped Joaquin craft an empathy message around that: “It seems like you are under a lot of pressure from your wife.” Joaquin was also in the middle of a divorce, so they decided to use that to relate to the wife issues, and they prepared an accusation audit—“I know you think I don’t care about costs and taking profits from the company”—in order to diffuse the negative energy and get Bruno talking.
It worked like a charm. Bruno immediately agreed with the accusation audit and began explaining why he thought Joaquin was careless with spending. Bruno also noted that he didn’t have someone to bail him out like Joaquin did (Joaquin had a wealthy father who could provide funding if needed).
They crafted their first “No” message:
The price you offered is very fair, and I certainly wish that I could afford it. Bruno has worked very hard for this business, and he deserves to be compensated appropriately. I am very sorry, but wish you the best of luck.
Joaquin was shocked when the following day he received an email from the advisor lowering the price to €28,346. Joaquin and Jesus then crafted their second gentle “No”:
Thank you again for your offer. You have really come down on the price, and I have tried very hard to come up with that amount. Unfortunately, no one is willing to lend me the money, not even my mother. I have tried various avenues but cannot come up with the funding. In the end, I can offer you €23,567, although I can only pay €15,321.37 upfront. I could pay you the remainder over a one-year period, but that is really the most I can do. I wish you the best in your decision.
Brilliant use of specific numbers, and what an empathy-building way to say “No” without using the word! And it worked. Within one hour, the advisor responded to accept.
Look at this closely: see how the mixture of mirroring and open-ended questions dragged out the information about Bruno’s financial problems, and then the “No” method exploited his desperation? It might just be a good strategy for you to use in the future.

The text has been repaired into clean, readable English. Here is the corrected version:

Great idea to use this method if there'd been another buyer, but with no one else it was a brilliant way to get Bruno to bid against himself.

KEY LESSONS
Superstar negotiators - real rainmakers - know that a negotiation is a playing field beneath the words where really getting to a good deal involves detecting and manipulating subtle, nonobvious signals beneath the surface. It is only by visualizing and modifying these subsurface issues that you can craft a great deal and make sure it is implemented.

As you put the following tools to use, remember this chapter's most important concept. That is, "Yes" is nothing without "How." Asking "How," knowing "How," and defining "How" are all part of the effective negotiator's arsenal. He would be unarmed without them.

Ask calibrated "How" questions, and ask them again and again. Asking "How" keeps your counterparts engaged but off balance. Answering the questions will give them the illusion of control. It will also lead them to contemplate your problems when making their demands.

Use "How" questions to shape the negotiating environment. You do this by using "How can I do that?" as a gentle version of "No." This will subtly push your counterpart to search for other solutions - your solutions. Very often it will get them to bid against themselves.

Don't just pay attention to the people you're negotiating with directly; always identify the motivations of the players "behind the table." You can do so by asking how a deal will affect everybody else and how on board they are.

Follow the 7-38-55 Percent Rule by paying close attention to tone of voice and body language. Incongruence between the words and nonverbal signs will show when your counterpart is lying or uncomfortable with a deal.

Is the "Yes" real or counterfeit? Test it with the Rule of Three: use calibrated questions, summaries, and labels to get your counterpart to reaffirm their agreement at least three times. It's really hard to repeatedly lie or fake conviction.

A person's use of pronouns offers deep insights into his or her relative authority. If you're hearing a lot of "I," "me," and "my," the real power to decide probably lies elsewhere. Picking up a lot of "we," "they," and "them," it's more likely you're dealing directly with a savvy decision maker keeping his options open.

Use your own name to make yourself a real person to the other side and even get your own personal discount. Humor and humanity are the best ways to break the ice and remove roadblocks. 

CHAPTER 9: BARGAIN HARD
A few years ago, I fell in love with a red Toyota 4Runner. Actually, not just "red," but "Salsa Red Pearl." Kind of a smoldering crimson that went perfectly with my taste and color schemes at the time. There was no doubt about it; this was the car of my dreams.

Most negotiations hit that inevitable point where the slightly loose and informal interplay between two people turns to confrontation and the proverbial "brass tacks." You know the moment: you've mirrored and labeled your way to a degree of rapport; an accusation audit has cleared any lingering mental or emotional obstacles, and you've identified and summarized the interests and positions at stake, eliciting a "That's right," and so forth.

Now it's time to bargain.

Here it is: the clash for cash, an uneasy dance of offers and counters that sends most people into a cold sweat. If you count yourself among that majority, regarding the inevitable moment as nothing more than a necessary evil, there's a good chance you regularly get your clock cleaned by those who have learned to embrace it.

No part of a negotiation induces more anxiety and unfocused aggression than bargaining, which is why it's the part that is more often fumbled and mishandled than any other. It's simply not a comfortable dynamic for most people. Even when we have the best-laid plans, a lot of us wimp out when we get to the moment of exchanging prices.

In this chapter, I'm going to explain the tactics that make up the bargaining process and look at how psychological dynamics determine which tactics should be used and how they should be implemented. Now, bargaining is not rocket science...

CE, but it's not simple intuition or mathematics either. To bargain well, you need to shed your assumptions about the haggling process and learn to recognize the subtle psychological strategies that play vital roles at the bargaining table. Skilled bargainers see more than just opening offers, counteroffers, and closing moves. They see the psychological currents that run below the surface.

Once you've learned to identify these currents, you'll be able to "read" bargaining situations more accurately and confidently answer the tactical questions that dog even the best negotiators. You'll be ready for the "bare-knuckle bargaining." And they'll never see it coming.

A few years ago, I was on my boat with one of my employees, a great guy named Keenon; I was supposed to be giving him a pep talk and performance review. "When I think of what we do, I describe it as 'uncovering the riptide,'" I said.

"Uncovering the riptide," Keenon said.

"Yes, the idea is that we—you and I and everyone here —have the skills to identify the psychological forces that are pulling us away from shore and use them to get somewhere more productive."

"Somewhere more productive," Keenon said.

"Exactly," I said. "To a place where we can . . ."

We had talked for about forty-five minutes when my son Brandon, who runs operations for The Black Swan Group, broke out laughing.

"I can't take it anymore! Don't you see? Really, Dad, don't you see?"

I blinked. Did I see what? I asked him.

"All Keenon is doing is mirroring you. And he's been doing it for almost an hour."

"Oh," I said, my face going red as Keenon began to laugh. He was totally right. Keenon had been playing with me the entire time, using the psychological tool that works most effectively with assertive guys like me: the mirror.

Of information time is being well spent. As long as they're communicating, they're happy. Their goal is to be on great terms with their counterpart. They love the win-win. Of the three types, they are most likely to build great rapport without actually accomplishing anything. Accommodators want to remain friends with their counterpart even if they can't reach an agreement. They are very easy to talk to, extremely friendly, and have pleasant voices. They will yield a concession to appease or acquiesce and hope the other side reciprocates. If your counterparts are sociable, peace-seeking, optimistic, distractible, and poor time managers, they're probably Accommodators. If they're your counterpart, be sociable and friendly. Listen to them talk about their ideas and use calibrated questions focused specifically on implementation to nudge them along and find ways to translate their talk into action. Due to their tendency to be the first to activate the reciprocity cycle, they may have agreed to give you something they can't actually deliver. Their approach to preparation can be lacking as they are much more focused on the person behind the table. They want to get to know you. They have a tremendous passion for the spirit of negotiation and what it takes not only to manage emotions but also to satisfy them. While it is very easy to disagree with an Accommodator, because they want nothing more than to hear what you have to say, uncovering their objections can be difficult. They will have identified potential problem areas beforehand and will leave those areas unaddressed out of fear of the conflict they may cause. If you have identified yourself as an Accommodator, stick to your ability to be very likable, but do not sacrifice your objections. Not only do the other two types need to hear your point of view; if you are dealing with another Accommodator, they will welcome it. Also be conscious of excess chitchat: the other two types have no use for it, and if you're sitting across the table from someone like yourself, you will be prone to interactions where nothing gets done. The Assertive type believes time is money; every wasted minute is a wasted dollar. Their self-image is linked to how many things they can get accomplished in a period of time. For them, getting the solution perfect isn't as important as getting it done. Assertives are fiery people who love winning above all else, often at the expense of others. Their colleagues and counterparts never question where they stand because they are always direct and candid. They have an aggressive communication style and they don't worry about future interactions. Their view of business relationships is based on respect, nothing more and nothing less. Most of all, the Assertive wants to be heard. And not only do they want to be heard, but they don't actually have the ability to listen to you until they know that you've heard them. They focus on their own goals rather than people. And they tell rather than ask. When you're dealing with Assertive types, it's best to focus on what they have to say, because once they are convinced you understand them, then and only then will they listen for your point of view. To an Assertive, every silence is an opportunity to speak more. Mirrors are a wonderful tool with this type. So are calibrated questions, labels, and summaries. The most important thing to get from an Assertive will be a "that's right" that may come in the form of a "that's it exactly" or "you hit it on the head." When it comes to reciprocity, this type is of the "give an inch/take a mile" mentality. They will have figured they deserve whatever you have given them so they will be oblivious to expectations of owing something in return. They will actually simply be looking for the opportunity to receive more. If you are an Assertive, be particularly conscious of your tone. You will not intend to be overly harsh but you will often come off that way. Intentionally soften your tone and work to make it more pleasant. Use calibrated questions and labels with your counterpart since that will also make you more approachable and increase the chances for collaboration. We've seen how each of these groups views the importance of time differently (time = preparation; time = relationship; time = money). They also have completely different interpretations of silence. I'm definitely an Assertive, and at a conference I once told me he expected nine of ten negotiations to fail. This CEO was likely projecting his beliefs onto the other side. In reality, he probably only matched with another like-minded one of ten times. If he understood that his counterpart was different from him, he would most surely have increased his success rate. From the way they prepare to the way they engage in dialogue, the three types negotiate differently. So before you can even think about bargaining effectively, you have to understand your counterpart's "normal." You have to identify their type by opening yourself to their difference. Because when it comes to negotiating, the Golden Rule is wrong. The Black Swan rule is don't treat others the way you want to be treated; treat them the way they need to be treated.

Some deals have ZOPAs and some don't. It's all very rational. Or so they'd have you think. You need to disabuse yourself of that notion. In a real bargaining session, kick-ass negotiators don't use ZOPA. Experienced negotiators often lead with a ridiculous offer, an extreme anchor. And if you're not prepared to handle it, you'll lose your moorings and immediately go to your maximum. It's human nature. Like the great ear-biting pugilist Mike Tyson once said, "Everybody has a plan until they get punched in the mouth." As a well-prepared negotiator who seeks information and gathers it relentlessly, you're actually going to want the other guy to name a price first, because you want to see his hand. You're going to welcome the extreme anchor. But extreme anchoring is powerful and you're human: your emotions may well up. If they do there are ways to weather the storm without bidding against yourself or responding with anger. Once you learn these tactics, you'll be prepared to withstand the hit and counter with panache. First, deflect the punch in a way that opens up your counterpart. Successful negotiators often say "No" in one of the many ways we've talked about ("How am I supposed to accept that?") or deflect the anchor with questions like "What are we trying to accomplish here?" Responses like these are great ways to refocus your counterpart when you feel you're being pulled into the compromise trap. You can also respond to a punch-in-the-face anchor by simply pivoting to terms. What I mean by this is that when you feel you're being dragged into a haggle, you can detour the conversation to the nonmonetary issues that make any final price work. You can do this directly by saying, in an encouraging tone of voice, "Let's put price off to the side for a moment and talk about what would make this a good deal." Or you could go at it more obliquely by asking, "What else would you be able to offer to make that a good price for me?" And if the other side pushes you to go first, wriggle from his grip. Instead of naming a price, allude to an incredibly high number that someone else might charge. Once when a hospital chain wanted me to name a price first, I said, "Well, if you go to Harvard Business School, they're going to charge you $2,500 a day per student." No matter what happens, the point here is to sponge up information from your counterpart. Letting your counterpart anchor first will give you a tremendous feel for him. All you need to learn is how to take the first punch. One of my Georgetown MBA students, a guy named Farouq, showed how not to fold after being punched when he went to hit up the MBA dean for funds to hold a big alumni event in Dubai. It was a desperate situation because he needed $600 and she was his last stop. At the meeting, Farouq told the dean about how excited the students were about the event and said that he needed her help. The dean was initially reluctant but eventually agreed to give him $500. However, Farouq wasn't satisfied with this amount. He knew that he could get more money if he showed her that he was serious about this project. So, he asked her for an additional $100. The dean was hesitant at first but eventually agreed to give him the extra money. This was a great example of how you can use the art of negotiation to get what you want. Farouq didn't just accept the initial offer; he pushed back and asked for more. And in the end, he got it. This is why it's so important to learn the skills of negotiation. It can make a huge difference in your life. When a negotiation is far from resolution and going nowhere fast, you need to shake things up and get your counterpart out of their rigid mindset. Strong moves can be enormously effective tools. Sometimes a situation simply calls for you to be the aggressor and punch the other side in the face. That said, if you are basically a nice person, it will be a real stretch to hit the other guy like Mike Tyson. You can't be what you're not. As the Danish folk saying goes, "You bake with the flour you have." But anyone can learn a few tools. Here are effective ways to assert smartly: REAL ANGER, THREATS WITHOUT ANGER, AND STRATEGIC UMBRAGE Marwan Sinaceur of INSEAD and Stanford University's Larissa Tiedens found that expressions of anger increase a negotiator's advantage and final take. Anger shows passion and conviction that can help sway the other side to accept less. However, by heightening your counterpart's sensitivity to danger and fear, your anger reduces the resources they have for other cognitive activity, setting them up to make bad concessions that will likely lead to implementation problems, thus reducing your gains. Also beware: researchers have also found that disingenuous expressions of unfelt anger - you know, faking it - backfire, leading to intractable demands and destroying trust. For anger to be effective, it has to be real, the key for it is to be under control because anger also reduces our cognitive ability. And so when someone puts out a ridiculous offer, one that really pisses you off, take a deep breath, allow little anger, and channel it - at the proposal, not the person - and say, "I don't see how that would ever work." Such well-timed offense-taking - known as "strategic umbrage" - can wake your counterpart to the problem. In studies by Columbia University academics Daniel Ames and Abbie Wazlawek, people on the receiving end of strategic umbrage were more likely to rate themselves as overassertive, even when the counterpart didn't think so. The real lesson here is being aware of how this might be used on you. Please don't allow yourself to fall victim to "strategic umbrage." Threats delivered without anger but with "poise" - that is, confidence and self-control - are great tools. Saying, "I'm sorry that just doesn't work for me," with poise, works. "Why?" questions Back in Chapter 7, I talked about the problems with "Why?" Across our planet and around the universe, "Why?" makes people defensive. As an experiment, the next time your boss wants something done ask him or her "Why?" and watch what happens.

"Try it with a peer, a subordinate, and a friend. Observe their reactions and tell me if you don't find some level of defensiveness across the spectrum. Don't do this too much, though, or you'll lose your job and all your friends. The only time I say, "Why did you do that?" in a negotiation is when I want to knock someone back. It's an iffy technique, though, and I wouldn't advocate it. There is, however, another way to use 'Why?' effectively. The idea is to employ the defensiveness the question triggers to get your counterpart to defend your position. I know it sounds weird, but it works. The basic format goes like this: When you want to flip a dubious counterpart to your side, ask them, "Why would you do that?" but in a way that the 'that' favors you. Let me explain. If you are working to lure a client away from a competitor, you might say, "Why would you ever do business with me? Why would you ever change from your existing supplier? They're great!" In these questions, the 'Why?' coaxes your counterpart into working for you. 'I' Messages Using the first-person singular pronoun is another great way to set a boundary without escalating into confrontation. When you say, "I'm sorry, that doesn't work for me," the word 'I' strategically focuses your counterpart's attention onto you long enough for you to make a point. The traditional 'I' message is to use 'I' to hit the pause button and step out of a bad dynamic. When you want to counteract unproductive statements from your counterpart, you can say, "I feel ___ when you ___ because ___," and that demands a time-out from the other person. But be careful with the big 'I': You have to be mindful not to use a tone that is aggressive or creates an argument. It's got to be cool and level. No Neediness: Having the Ready-to-Walk Mindset We've said previously that no deal is better than a bad deal. If you feel you can't say 'No,' then you've taken yourself hostage. Once you're clear on what your bottom line is, you have to be willing to walk away. Never be needy for a deal. Before we move on, I want to emphasize how important it is to maintain a collaborative relationship even when you're setting boundaries. Your response must always be expressed in the form of strong, yet empathic, limit-setting boundaries—that is, tough love—not as hatred or violence. Anger and other strong emotions can on rare occasions be effective. But only as calculated acts, never a personal attack. In any bare-knuckle bargaining session, the most vital principle to keep in mind is never to look at your counterpart as an enemy. The person across the table is never the problem. The unsolved issue is. So focus on the issue. This is one of the most basic tactics for avoiding emotional escalations. Our culture demonizes people in movies and politics, which creates the mentality that if we only got rid of the person then everything would be okay. But this dynamic is toxic to any negotiation. Punching back is a last resort. Before you go there, I always suggest an attempt at de-escalating the situation. Suggest a time-out. When your counterparts step back and take a breath, they'll no longer feel that they are hostage to a bad situation. They'll regain a sense of agency and power. And they'll appreciate you for it. The Ackerman Model is an offer-counteroffer method, at least on the surface. But it is a very effective system for beating the usual lackluster bargaining dynamic, which has the predictable result of meeting in the middle. The systematized and easy-to-remember process has only four steps: 1. Set your target price (your goal). 2. Set your first offer at 65 percent of your target price. 3. Calculate three raises of decreasing increments (to 85, 95, and 100 percent). 4. Use lots of empathy and different ways of saying 'No' to get the other side to counter before you increase your offer. 5. When calculating the final amount, use precise, nonround numbers like, say, $37,893 rather than $38,000. It gives the number credibility and weight. 6. On your final number, throw in a nonmonetary item (that they probably don't want) to show you're at your limit. The genius of this system is that it incorporates the psychological tactics we've discussed—reciprocity, extreme anchors, loss aversion, and so on—without you needing to think about them."

Negotiating a Rent Cut After Receiving Notice of an Increase
Eight months after a Georgetown MBA student named Mishary signed a rental contract for $1,850/month, he got some unwelcome news: his landlord informed him that if he wanted to re-up, it would be $2,100/month for ten months, or $2,000/month for a year. Mishary loved the place and didn't think he'd find a better one, but the price was already high and he couldn't afford more.
Taking to heart our class slogan, "You fall to your highest level of preparation," he dove into the real estate listings and found that prices for comparable apartments were $1,800-$1,950/month, but none of them were in as good a building. He then examined his own finances and figured the rent he wanted to pay was $1,830.
He requested a sit-down with his rental agent. This was going to be tough.
At their meeting, Mishary laid out his situation. His experience in the building had been really positive, he said. And, he pointed out, he always paid on time. It would be sad for him to leave, he said, and sad for the landlord to lose a good tenant. The agent nodded.
"Totally in agreement," he said. "That's why I think it will benefit both of us to agree on renewing the lease."
Here Mishary pulled out his research: buildings around the neighborhood were offering much lower prices, he said. "Even though your building is better in terms of location and services, how do you price lease renewals?"
The agent didn't say anything shocking—merely that they used factors like area prices and supply-and-demand—but that gave Mishary the opening to argue that his leaving would open the landlord to the risk of having an unrented apartment and the cost of repainting. One month unrented would be a $2,000 loss, he said.
Then he made another offer. Now, you're probably shaking your head that he's making two offers without receiving one in return. And you're right; normally that's verboten. But you have to be able to improvise. If you feel in control of a negotiation, you can do two or three moves at a time. Don't let the rules ruin the flow.
"Let me try and move along with you: how about $1,790 for 12 months?"

ou find yourself face-to-face with a bare-knuckle bargainer, remember the lessons in this chapter. Identify your counterpart's negotiating style. Once you know whether they are Accommodator, Assertive, or Analyst, you'll know the correct way to approach them. Prepare, prepare, prepare. When the pressure is on, you don't rise to the occasion; you fall to your highest level of preparation. So design an ambitious but legitimate goal and then game out the labels, calibrated questions, and responses you'll use to get there. That way, once you're at the bargaining table, you won't have to wing it. Get ready to take a punch. Kick-ass negotiators usually lead with an extreme anchor to knock you off your game. If you're not ready, you'll flee to your maximum without a fight. So prepare your dodging tactics to avoid getting sucked into the compromise trap. Set boundaries, and learn to take a punch or punch back, without anger. The guy across the table is not the problem; the situation is. Prepare an Ackerman plan. Before you head into the weeds of bargaining, you'll need a plan of extreme anchor, calibrated questions, and well-defined offers. Remember: 65, 85, 95, 100 percent. Decreasing raises and ending on nonround numbers will get your counterpart to believe that he's squeezing you for all you're worth when you're really getting to the number you want. CHAPTER 10 FIND THE BLACK SWAN At exactly 3 p.m., Griffin gestured toward one of his hostages, a twenty-nine-year-old teller named Margaret Moore, and told her to walk to the glass bank doors. Petrified, Moore did as she was ordered, but first cried out that she was a single parent with a young son. Griffin didn't seem to hear her or to care. Once the weeping Moore made it to the vestibule, Griffin shot off two blasts from his twelve-gauge shotgun. Both of the heavy rounds struck Moore in the midsection, violently blowing her through the glass door and almost cutting her body in half. Outside, law enforcement was stunned into silence. It was obvious that Griffin didn't want money or respect or an escape route. The only way he was coming out was in a body bag. At that moment, Griffin walked over to a full-length bank window and pressed his body against the glass. He was in full view of a sniper stationed in the church across the street. Griffin knew quite well that the sniper was there; earlier in the day he'd shot at him. Less than a second after Griffin's silhouette appeared in his scope, the sniper pulled the trigger. Griffin crumpled to the floor, dead. Black Swan theory tells us that things happen that were previously thought to be impossible—or never thought of at all. This is not the same as saying that sometimes things happen against one-in-a-million odds, but rather that things never imagined do come to pass. The idea of the Black Swan was popularized by risk analyst Nassim Nicholas Taleb in his bestselling books Fooled by Randomness (2001) and The Black Swan (2007), but the term goes back much further. Until the seventeenth century, people could only imagine white swans because all swans ever seen had possessed white feathers. In seventeenth-century London, it was common to refer to impossible things as "Black Swans." But then the Dutch explorer Willem de Vlamingh went to western Australia in 1697—and saw a black swan. Suddenly the unthinkable and unthought of was real. Black Swans are just a metaphor, of course. Think of Pearl Harbor, the rise of the Internet, 9/11, and the recent banking crisis. None of the events above was predicted—yet on reflection, the markers were all there. It's just that people weren't paying attention. As Taleb uses the term, the Black Swan symbolizes the uselessness of predictions based on previous experience. Black Swans are events or pieces of knowledge that sit outside our regular expectations and therefore cannot be predicted. This is a crucial concept in negotiation. In every negotiating session, there are different kinds of information. There are those things we know, like our counterpart's name and their offer and our experiences from other negotiations. Those are known knowns. There are those things we are certain that exist but we don't know, like the possibility that the other side might get sick and leave us with another counterpart. Those are known unknowns and they are like poker wild cards; you know they're out there but you don't know who has them. But most important are those things we don't know that we don't know, pieces of information we've never imagined but that would be game changing if uncovered. Maybe our counterpart wants the deal to fail because he's leaving for fo.

These unknowns are Black Swans. With their known knowns and prior expectations so firmly guiding their approach, Van Zandt and really the entire FBI were blind to the clues and connections that showed there was something outside of the predictable at play. They couldn't see the Black Swans in front of them.
I don't mean to single out Van Zandt here. He did all of law enforcement a service by highlighting this event and he told me and a room full of agents the story of that horrible June day during a training session at Quantico. It was an introduction to the suicide-by-cop phenomenon—when an individual deliberately creates a crisis situation to provoke a lethal response from law enforcement—but there was an even greater lesson at stake: the point of the story then, and now, was how important it is to recognize the unexpected to make sure things like Moore's death never happen again.
On that day in June 1981, O'Brien kept calling the bank, but each time the bank employee who answered quickly hung up. It was at that moment they should have realized the situation was outside of the known. Hostage-takers always talked because they always had demands; they always wanted to be heard, respected, and paid. But this guy didn't.
Then, midway through the standoff, a police officer entered the command post with the news that a double homicide with a third person critically wounded had been reported a few blocks away. "Do we need to know this?" Van Zandt said. "Is there a connection?" No one knew or found out in time. If they had, they might have uncovered a second Black Swan: that Griffin had already killed several people without making monetary demands.
And then, a few hours in, the hostage-taker had one of the hostages read a note to the police over the phone. Curiously, there were no demands. Instead, it was a rambling diatribe about Griffin's life and the wrongs he'd endured. The note was so long and unfocused it was never read in its entirety. Because of this, one important line—another Black Swan—wasn't registered: ". . after the police take my life . . ." Because these Black Swans weren't uncovered, Van Zandt and his colleagues never saw the situation for what it was: Griffin wanted to die, and he wanted the police to do it for him.
Nothing like this—a shootout on a deadline?—had ever happened to the FBI, so they tried to fit the information into what had happened in the past. Into the old templates. They wondered, What does he actually want? After scaring them for a bit, they expected Griffin to pick up the phone and start a dialogue. No one gets killed on deadline. Or so they thought.
The lesson of what happened at 3 p.m. on June 17, 1981, in Rochester, New York, was that when bits and pieces of a case don't add up, it's usually because our frames of reference are off; they will never add up unless we break free of our expectations. Every case is new. We must let what we know—our known knowns—guide us but not blind us to what we do not know; we must remain flexible and adaptable to any situation; we must always retain a beginner's mind; and we must never overvalue our experience or undervalue the informational and emotional realities served up moment by moment in whatever situation we face.
But those were not the only important lessons of that tragic event. If an overreliance on known knowns can blind a negotiator to assumptions that prevent him from seeing and hearing all that a situation presents, then perhaps an enhanced receptivity to the unknown unknowns can free that same negotiator to see and hear the things that can produce dramatic breakthroughs.
From the moment I walked into the room, my heart began to race. I had no idea what to expect or how to proceed. The atmosphere was tense, and I could feel everyone's eyes on me. As I spoke, I tried to focus on the task at hand: listening intently for any clues that might reveal something unexpected.
Negotiations will always suffer from limited predictability. Your counterpart may tell you, "It's a lovely plot of land," without mentioning that it is also a Superfund site. They'll say, "Are the neighbors noisy? Well, everyone makes a bit of noise, don't they?" when the actual fact is that a heavy metal band practices there nightly.
It is the person best able to uncover, adapt to, and exploit the unknowns that will come out on top. To uncover these unknowns, we must interrogate our world, put out a call, and intensely listen to the response. Ask lots of questions. Read nonverbal clues and always voice your observations with your counterpart.
This is nothing beyond what you've been learning up to now. It is merely more intense and intuitive. You have to feel for the truth behind the camouflage; you have to note the small pauses that suggest discomfort and lies. Don't look to verify what you expect. If you do, that's what you'll find.
Instead, you must open yourself up to the factual reality that is in front of you. This is why my company changed its format for preparing and engaging in a negotiation. No matter how much research our team has done prior to the interaction, we always ask ourselves, "Why are they communicating what they are communicating right now?" Remember, negotiation is more like walking on a tightrope than competing against an opponent. Focusing so much on the end objective will only distract you from the next step, and that can cause you to fall off the rope. Concentrate on the next step because the rope will lead you

completely oblivious to its importance. Your counterpart always has pieces of information whose value they do not understand.
The THREE TYPES OF LEVERAGE
I’m going to come back to specific techniques for uncovering Black Swans, but first I’d like to examine what makes them so useful.
The answer is leverage. Black Swans are leverage multipliers. They give you the upper hand. Now, “leverage” is the magic word, but it’s also one of those concepts that negotiation experts casually throw about but rarely delve into, so I’d like to do so here.
In theory, leverage is the ability to inflict loss and withhold gain. Where does your counterpart want to gain and what do they fear losing? Discover these pieces of information, we are told, and you’ll build leverage over the other side’s perceptions, actions, and decisions. In practice, where our irrational perceptions are our reality, loss and gain are slippery notions, and it often doesn’t matter what leverage actually exists against you; what really matters is the leverage they think you have on them. That’s why I say there’s always leverage: as an essentially emotional concept, it can be manufactured whether it exists or not.
If they’re talking to you, you have leverage. Who has leverage in a kidnapping? The kidnapper or the victim’s family? Most people think the kidnapper has all the leverage. Sure, the kidnapper has something you love, but you have something they lust for. Which is more powerful?
Moreover, how many buyers do the kidnappers have for the commodity they are trying to sell? What business is successful if there’s only one buyer?
Leverage has a lot of inputs, like time and necessity and competition. If you need to sell your house now, you have less leverage than if you don’t have a deadline. If you want to sell it but don’t, you have more. And if various people are bidding on it at once, good on you.
I should note that leverage is not the same thing as power. Donald Trump has tons of power, but if he’s stranded in a desert and the owner of the only store for miles has the water he wants, the vendor has the leverage.
One way to understand leverage is as a fluid that sloshes between the parties. As a negotiator you should always be aware of which side, at any given moment, feels they have the most to lose if negotiations collapse. The party who feels they have more to lose and are the most afraid of that loss has less leverage, and vice versa. To get leverage, you have to persuade your counterpart that they have something real to lose if the deal falls through.
At a taxonomic level, there are three kinds: Positive, Negative, and Normative.
POSITIVE LEVERAGE
Positive leverage is quite simply your ability as a negotiator to provide—or withhold—things that your counterpart wants. Whenever the other side says, “I want . . .” as in, “I want to buy your car,” you have positive leverage. When they say that, you have power: you can make their desire come true; you can withhold it and thereby inflict pain; or you can use their desire to get a better deal with another party.
Here’s an example:
Three months after you’ve put your business on the market, a potential buyer finally tells you, “Yes, I’d like to buy it.” You’re thrilled, but a few days later your joy turns to disappointment when he delivers an offer so low it’s insulting. This is the only offer you have, so what do you do?
Now, hopefully you’ve had contact with other buyers, even casually. If you have, you can use the offer to create a sense of competition, and thereafter kick off a bidding war. At least you’ll force them to make a choice.
But even if you don’t have other offers or the interested buyer is your first choice, you have more power than before your counterpart revealed his desire. You control what they want.
This kind of leverage gets people’s attention because of a concept we’ve discussed: loss aversion. As effective negotiators have long known and psychologists have repeatedly proven, potential losses loom larger in the human mind than do similar gains. Getting a good deal may push us toward making a risky bet, but saving our reputation from destruction is a much stronger motivation.
So what kind of Black Swans do you look to be aware of as negative leverage? Effective negotiators look for pieces of information, often obliquely revealed, that show what is important to their counterpart: Who is their audience? What signifies status and reputation to them? What most worries them? To find this information, one method is to go outside the negotiating table and speak to a third party that knows your counterpart. The most effective method is to gather it from interactions with your counterpart.
That said, a word of warning: I do not believe in making direct threats and am extremely careful even with subtle ones. Threats can be like nuclear bombs. There will be a toxic residue that will be difficult to clean up. You have to handle the potential of negative consequences with care, or you will hurt yourself and poison or blow up the whole process.
If you shove your negative leverage down your counterpart’s throat, it might be perceived as you taking away their autonomy. People will often sooner die than give up their autonomy. They’ll at least act irrationally and shut off the negotiation. A more subtle technique is to label your negative leverage and thereby make it clear without attacking. Sentences like “It seems like you strongly value the fact that you’ve always paid on time” or “It seems like you don’t care what position you are leaving me in” can really open up the negotiation process.
NORMATIVE LEVERAGE
Every person has a set of rules and a moral framework. Normative leverage is using the other party’s norms and standards to advance your position. If you can show inconsistencies between their beliefs and their actions, you have normative leverage. No one likes to look like a hypocrite.
For example, if your counterpart lets slip that they generally pay a certain multiple of cash flow when they buy a company, you can frame your desired price in a way that reflects that valuation. Discovering the Black Swans that give you normative valuation can be as easy as asking what your counterpart believes and listening openly. You want to see what language they speak, and speak it back to them.
KNOW THEIR RELIGION
In March 2003 I led the negotiation with a farmer who became one of the most unlikely post-9/11 terrorists

You can imagine the drama that started when Dwight Watson, a North Carolina tobacco grower, hooked up his jeep to a John Deere tractor festooned with banners and an inverted U.S. flag and towed it to Washington, D.C., to protest government policies he thought were putting tobacco farmers out of business.

When Watson got to the capital, he pulled his tractor into a pond between the Washington Monument and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and threatened to blow it up with the "organophosphate" bombs he claimed were inside. The capital went into lockdown as the police blocked off an eight-block area from the Lincoln Memorial to the Washington Monument. Coming just months after the Beltway sniper attacks and alongside the buildup to the Iraq War, the ease with which Watson threw the nation's capital into turmoil freaked people out.

Talking on his cell phone, Watson told the Washington Post that he was on a do-or-die mission to show how reduced subsidies were killing tobacco farmers. He told the Post that God had instructed him to stage his protest and he wasn't going to leave. "If this is the way America will be run, the hell with it," he said. "I will not surrender. They can blow [me] out of the water. I'm ready to go to heaven."

The FBI deployed me to a converted RV on the National Mall, where I was to guide a team of FBI agents and U.S. Park Police as we tried to talk Watson out of killing himself and who knows how many others. And then we got down to business. Like you'd expect of a negotiation with a guy threatening to destroy a good part of the U.S. capital, it was righteously tense. Sharpshooters had their weapons trained on Watson, and they had the "green light" to shoot if he made any crazy moves.

In any negotiation, but especially in a tense one like this, it's not how well you speak but how well you listen that determines your success. Understanding the "other" is a precondition to be able to speak persuasively and develop options that resonate for them. There is the visible negotiation and then all the things that are hidden under the surface (the secret negotiation space wherein the Black Swans dwell).

Access to this hidden space very often comes through understanding the other side's worldview, their reason for being, their religion. Indeed, digging into your counterpart's "religion" (sometimes involving God but not always) inherently implies moving beyond the negotiating table and into the life, emotional and otherwise, of your counterpart.

Once you've understood your counterpart's worldview, you can build influence. That's why as we talked with Watson I spent my energy trying to unearth who he was rather than logically arguing him into surrender. From this we learned that Watson had been finding it increasingly hard to make a living on his 1,200-acre tobacco farm, which had been in his family for five generations. After being hit by a drought and having his crop quota cut by half, Watson decided he couldn't afford the farm anymore and drove to Washington to make his point. He wanted attention, and knowing what he wanted gave us positive leverage.

Watson also told us he was a veteran, and veterans had rules. This is the kind of music you want to hear, as it provides normative leverage. He told us that he would be willing to surrender but not right away. As a military police officer in the 82nd Airborne in the 1970s, he believed that if Christ came out on the Dawn of the Third Day, why not him?

It was a brilliant use of deep listening. By combining that subtext of Watson's words with knowledge of his worldview she let us show Watson that we not only were listening but had also heard him. If we'd understood his subtext correctly, this would let him end the standoff honorably and do so with the feeling that he was surrendering to an adversary that respected him and his beliefs.

By positioning your demands within the worldview your counterpart uses to make decisions, you show them respect and that gets you attention and results. Knowing your counterpart's religion is more than just gaining normative leverage per se. Rather, it's gaining a holistic understanding of your counterpart's worldview—in this case, literally a religion—and using that knowledge to inform your negotiating moves.

Using your counterpart's religion is extremely effective in large part because it has authority over them. The other guy's "religion" is what the market, the experts, God, or society—whatever matters to him—has determined to be fair and just. And people defer to that authority.

In the next conversation with Watson, we mentioned that the next morning was the Dawn of the Third Day. There was a long moment of silence on the other end of the line. Our Negotiation Operation Center was so quiet you could hear the heartbeat of the guy next to you. Watson coughed. "I'll come out," he said. And he did, ending a forty-eight-hour standoff.

andoff, saving himself from harm and allowing the nation’s capital to resume its normal life. No explosives were found. While the importance of “knowing their religion” should be clear from Watson’s story, here are two tips for reading religion correctly: Review everything you hear. You will not hear everything the first time, so double-check. Compare notes with your team members. You will often discover new information that will help you advance the negotiation. In other words: listen, listen again, and listen some more. We’ve seen how a holistic understanding of your counterpart’s “religion”—a huge Black Swan—can provide normative leverage that leads to negotiating results. But there are other ways in which learning your counterpart’s “religion” enables you to achieve better outcomes. THE SIMILARITY PRINCIPLE Researched by social scientists has confirmed something effective negotiators have known for ages: namely, we trust people more when we view them as being similar or familiar. People trust those who are in their in-group. Belonging is a primal instinct. And if you can trigger that instinct, that sense that, “Oh, we see the world the same way,” then you immediately gain influence. When our counterpart displays attitudes, beliefs, ideas—even modes of dress—that are similar to our own, we tend to like and trust them more. Similarities as shallow as club memberships or college alumni status increase rapport. That’s why in many cultures negotiators spend large amounts of time building rapport before they even think of offers. Both sides know that the information they glean could be vital to effective deal making and leverage building. It’s a bit like dogs circling each other, smelling each other’s behind. I once worked a deal for our services with this CEO in Ohio where the similarity principle played a major role. My counterpart was constantly making references that I recognized as being sort of born-again Christian material. As we talked he kept going back and forth on whether he should bring in his advisors. The whole issue of his advisors clearly pained him; at one point he even said, “Nobody understands me.” At that moment I began to rack my brain for the Christian word that captured the essence of what he was saying. And then the term came to my mind, a term people often used in church to describe the duty one had to administer our own and our world’s—and therefore God’s—resources with honesty, accountability, and responsibility. “This is really stewardship for you, isn’t it?” I said. His voice immediately strengthened. “Yes! You’re the only one who understands,” he said. And he hired us at that moment. By showing that I understood his deeper reasons for being and accessing a sense of similarity, of mutual belongingness, I was able to bring him to the deal. The minute I established a kind of shared identity with this Christian, we were in. Not simply because of similarity alone, but because of the understanding implied by that moment of similarity. THE POWER OF HOPES AND DREAMS Once you know your counterpart’s religion and can visualize what he truly wants out of life, you can employ those aspirations as a way to get him to follow you. Every engineer, every executive, every child—all of us want to believe we are capable of the extraordinary. As children, our daydreams feature ourselves as primary players in great moments: an actor winning an Oscar, an athlete hitting the game-winning shot. As we grow older, however, our parents, teachers, and friends talk more of what we can’t and shouldn’t do than what is possible. We begin to lose faith. But when someone displays a passion for what we’ve always wanted and conveys a purposeful plan of how to get there, we allow our perceptions of what’s possible to change. We’re all hungry for a map to joy, and when someone is courageous enough to draw it for us, we naturally follow. So when you ascertain your counterpart’s unattained goals, invoke your own power and follow-ability by expressing passion for their goals—and for their ability to achieve them. Ted Leonsis is great at this. As the owner of the Washington Wizards professional basketball team and the Washington Capitals professional hockey team, he is always talking about creating the immortal moments in sports that people will tell their grandchildren about. Who doesn’t want to hire my firm if they agree to hire me? IT’S NOT CRAZY, IT’S A CLUE It’s not human nature to embrace the unknown. It scares us. When we are confronted by it, we ignore it, we run away, or we label it in ways that allow us to dismiss it. In negotiations, that label most often takes the form of the statement, “They’re crazy!” But that’s absolutely wrongheaded. We must understand these things. I’m not saying that because I’m a softheaded pacifist (the FBI doesn’t hire agents like that) but because I know understanding such things is the best way to discover the other side’s vulnerabilities and wants and thereby gain influence. You can’t get that stuff unless you talk. No one is immune to “They’re crazy!” You can see it rear its head in every kind of negotiation, from parenting to congressional deal making to corporate bargaining. But the moment when we’re most ready to throw our hands up and declare “They’re crazy!” is often the best moment for discovering Black Swans that transform a negotiation. It is when we hear or see something that threatens our preconceived notions of who or what the other side is, allowing us to see them in a new light and potentially change the course of the negotiation.

The text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts. Repair it into clean, readable English. Do not summarize or omit content.
TEXT:
at	doesn’t
make	 sense—something	 “crazy”—that	 a	 crucial	 fork	 in	 the
road	 is	 presented:	 push	 forward,	 even	 more	 forcefully,	
into
that	which	we	initially	can’t	process;	or	take	the	other	path,
the	one	to	guaranteed	failure,	in	which	we	tell	ourselves	that
negotiating	was	useless	anyway.
In	 their	 great	 book	
Negotiation	 Genius
,
4
	 Harvard
Business	 School	 professors	 Deepak	 Malhotra	 and	 Max	 H.
Bazerman	provide	a	look	at	the	common	reasons	negotiators
mistakenly	 call	 their	 counterparts	 crazy.	 I’d	 like	 to	 talk
through	them	here.
MISTAKE	#1:	THEY	ARE	ILL-INFORMED
Often	the	other	side	is	acting	on	bad	information,	and	when
people	 have	 bad	 information	 they	 make	 bad	 choices.
There’s	 a	 great	 computer	 industry	 term	 for	 this:	 GIGO—
Garbage	In,	Garbage	Out.
As	 an	 example,	 Malhotra	 talks	 about	 a	 student	 of	 his
who	was	in	a	dispute	with	an	ex-employee	who	claimed	he
was	 owed	 $130,000	 in	 commissions	 for	 work	 he	 had	 done
before	being	fired;	he	was	threatening	a	lawsuit.
Confused,	 the	 executive	 turned	 to	 the	 company’s
accountants.	There	he	discovered	the	problem:	the	accounts
had	been	a	mess	when	the	employee	was	fired	but	had	since
been	 put	 into	 order.	 With	 the	 clean	 information,	 the
accountants	assured	the	executive	that	in	fact	the	employee
owed	the	company	$25,000.
Eager	 to	 avoid	 a	 lawsuit,	 the	 executive	 called	 the
employee,	explained	the	situation,	and	made	an	offer:	if	the
employee	 dropped	 the	lawsuit	 he	 could	 keep	 the	 $25,000.
To	 his	 surprise,	 the	 employee	 said	 that	 he	 was	 going
forward	with	the	suit	anyway;	he	acted	irrational,	crazy.
Malhotra	 told	 his	 student	 that	 the	 problem	 was	 not
craziness,	 but	 a	 lack	 of	 information	 and	 trust.	 So	 the
executive	had	an	outside	accounting	firm	audit	the	numbers
and	send	the	results	to	the	employee.
The	result?	The	employee	dropped	the	suit.
The	 clear	 point	 here	 is	 that	 people	 operating	 with
incomplete	 information	 appear	 irrational,	 but	 they	 are	 simply	 trying
to	 make	 the	 best	 decision	 possible	 based	 on	 the	 facts
that	 they	 have.	 Understanding	 this	 can	 help	 you	 to	 better
negotiate	and	resolve	disputes.
MISTAKE	#2:	THEY	ARE	CONSTRAINED
Sometimes,	people	may	seem	irrational	because	they	are	being	forced
to	make	decisions	based	on	external	factors	that	you	don’t	know
about.	 For	 example,	 an	 employee	might	decide	to	quit	in	the
middle	of	a	career-making	project,	just	before	bonus	season,
because	 he	 or	 she	 has	 learned	 that	 colleagues	 are	 making
more	 money.	 For	 that	 employee,	 fairness	is	as	much	an
interest	as	money.
Whatever	the	specifics	of	the	situation,	these	people	are
not	 acting	 irrationally.	 They	 are	 simply	 complying	with
needs	 and	 desires	 that	 you	don’t	 yet	 understand,	 what	 the
world	 looks	 like	 to	 them	 based	 on	 their	 own	 set	 of	 rules.
Your	job	is	to	bring	these	Black	Swans	to	light.
To	uncover	these	hidden	factors,	you	need	to	establish	personal,
face-to-face	relationships	with	your	counterparts.	 Today,	 a	 lot	 of	 younger	 people	 do	 almost	 everything
over	 email.	 But	 it’s	 very	 difficult	 to	 find	 Black	 Swans	with	 email	for	 the	simple
reason	 that,	 even	 if	 you	 knock	 your	 counterpart	 off	 their
moorings	with	great	labels	and	calibrated	questions,	email	doesn’t	allow
for	tone-of-voice	effects,	and	 it	 doesn’t	 let	 you	 read	 the
nonverbal	parts	of	your	counterpart’s	response	(remember	7-38-55).
By	getting	out	there	and	establishing	personal	relationships,	you	can
begin	to	uncover	these	hidden	factors	that	are	influencing	your
counterpart’s	decisions.	 In	turn,	this	will	allow	you	to	negotiate
more	effectively.

ted he was the wrong guy. He admitted that his division was a mess and he'd have to hand things off to somebody else to get the deal done. And he did. It took more than a year to get the deal signed, but they did it.

Observing unguarded moments is also effective during unguarded moments at the fringes, whether at meals like my client had with his Coca-Cola contact, or the brief moments of relaxation before or after formal interactions. During a typical business meeting, the first few minutes, before you actually get down to business, and the last few moments, as everyone is leaving, often tell you more about the other side than anything in between. That's why reporters have a credo to never turn off their recorders: you always get the best stuff at the beginning and the end of an interview.

Also pay close attention to your counterpart during interruptions, odd exchanges, or anything that interrupts the flow. When someone breaks ranks, people's façades crack just a little. Simply noticing whose cracks and how others respond verbally and nonverbally can reveal a gold mine. 

When it doesn't make sense, there's cents to be made. Students often ask me whether Black Swans are specific kinds of information or any kind that helps. I always answer that they are anything that you don't know that changes things.

To drive this home, here's the story of one of my MBA students who was interning for a private equity real estate firm in Washington. Faced with actions from his counterpart that didn't pass the sense test, he innocently turned up one of the greatest Black Swans I've seen in years by using a label.

My student had been performing due diligence on potential targets when a principal at the firm asked him to look into a mixed-use property in the heart of Charleston, South Carolina. He had no experience in the Charleston market, so he called the broker selling the property and requested the marketing package.

After discussing the deal and the market, my student and his boss decided that the asking price of $4.3 million was about $450,000 too high. At that point, my student called the broker again to discuss pricing and next steps. After initial pleasantries, the broker asked my student what he thought of the property.

"It looks like an interesting property," he said. "Unfortunately, we don't know the market fundamentals. We like downtown and King Street in particular, but we have a lot of questions."

The broker then told him that he had been in the market for more than fifteen years, so he was well informed. At this point, my student pivoted to calibrated "How" and "What" questions in order to gather information and judge the broker's skills.

"Great," my student said. "First and foremost, how has Charleston been affected by the economic downturn?" The broker replied with a detailed answer, citing specific examples of market improvement. In the process, he showed my student that he was very knowledgeable.

"It sounds like I'm in good hands!" he said, using a label to build empathy. "Next question: What sort of cap rate can be expected in this type of building?" Through the ensuing back-and-forth, my student learned that owners could expect rates of 6 to 7 percent because buildings like this were popular with students at the local university, a growing school where 60 percent of the student body lived off campus.

He also learned that it would be prohibitively expensive — if not physically impossible — to buy land nearby and build a similar building. In the last five years, no one had built on the street because of historic preservation rules. Even if they could buy land, the broker said a similar building would cost $2.5 million just in construction.

"The building is in great shape, especially compared to the other options available to students," he said. "If he or she is selling such a cash cow, it seems like the seller must have doubts about future market fundamentals," he said.

"Well," he said, "the seller has some tougher properties in Atlanta and Savannah, so he has to get out of this property to pay back the other mortgages." Bingo! With that, my student had unearthed a fantastic Black Swan. The seller was suffering constraints that, until that moment, had been unknown.

My student put the broker on mute as he described other properties and used the moment to discuss pricing with his boss. He quickly gave him the green light to make a lowball offer—an extreme anchor—to try to yank the broker to his minimum.

After quizzing the broker if the seller would be willing to close quickly, my student set his anchor. "I think I have heard enough," he said. "We are willing to offer $3.4 million."

"Okay," the broker answered. "That is well below the asking price. However, I can bring the offer to the seller and see what he thinks." Later that day, the broker came back with a counteroffer. The seller had told him that the number was too low, but he was willing to take $3.7 million. My student could barely keep from falling off his chair; the counteroffer was lower than his goal. But rather than jump at the amount—and risk leaving value on the table with a wimp-win deal—my student pushed further.

He said "No" without using the word. "That is closer to what we believe the value to be, but we cannot in good conscience pay more than $3.55 million." (Later, my student told me—and I agreed—that he should have used a label or calibrated question here to push the broker to bid against himself. But he was so surprised by how far the price had dropped that he stumbled into old-school haggling.)

"I am only authorized to go down to $3.6 million," the broker answered, clearly showing that he'd never taken a negotiation class that taught the Ackerman model and how to pivot to terms to avoid the haggle. My student's boss signaled to him that $3.6 million worked and he agreed to the price.

I've teased several of the techniques my student used to effectively negotiate a great deal for his firm, from the use of labels and calibrated questions to the probing of constraints to unearth a beautiful Black Swan. It also bears noting that my student did tons of work beforehand and had prepared labels and questions so that he was ready to jump on the Black Swan when the broker offered it. Once he knew what the Black Swan was, the rest became much easier.

at the seller was trying to get money out of this building to pay off mortgages on the underperforming ones, he knew that timing was important. Of course, there’s always room for improvement. Afterward my student told me he wished he hadn’t lowballed the offer so quickly and instead used the opportunity to discuss the other properties. He might have found more investment opportunities within the seller's portfolio. In addition, he could have potentially built more empathy and teased out more unknown unknowns with labels or calibrated questions like “What markets are you finding difficult right now?” Maybe even gotten face time with the seller directly. Still, well done! Overcoming fear and learning to get what you want out of life People generally fear conflict, so they avoid useful arguments out of fear that the tone will escalate into personal attacks they cannot handle. People in close relationships often avoid making their own interests known and instead compromise across the board to avoid being perceived as greedy or self-interested. They fold, they grow bitter, and they grow apart. We’ve all heard of marriages that ended in divorce and the couple never fought. Families are just an extreme version of all parts of humanity, from government to business. Except for a few naturals, everyone hates negotiation at first. Your hands sweat, your fight-or-flight kicks in (with a strong emphasis on flight), and your thoughts trip drunkenly over themselves. The natural first impulse for most of us is to chicken out, throw in the towel, run. The mere idea of tossing out an extreme anchor is traumatic. That’s why wimp-win deals are the norm in the kitchen and in the boardroom. But stop and think about that. Are we really afraid of the guy across the table? I can promise you that, with very few exceptions, he’s not going to reach across and slug you. No, our sweaty palms are just an expression of physiological fear, a few trigger-happy neurons firing because of something more base: our innate human desire to get along with other members of the tribe. It’s not the guy across the table who scares us; it’s conflict itself. If this book accomplishes only one thing, I hope it gets you over that fear of conflict and encourages you to navigate it with empathy. If you’re going to be great at anything—a great negotiator, a great manager, a great husband, a great wife—you’re going to have to do that. You’re going to have to ignore that little genie who’s telling you to give up, to just get along—as well as that other genie who’s telling you to lash out and yell. You’re going to have to embrace regular, thoughtful conflict as the basis of effective negotiation—and of life. Please remember that our emphasis throughout the book is that the adversary is the situation and that the person that you appear to be in conflict with is actually your partner. More than a little research has shown that genuine, honest conflict between people over their goals actually helps energize the problem-solving process in a collaborative way. Skilled negotiators have a talent for using conflict to keep the negotiation going without stumbling into a personal battle. Remember, pushing hard for what you believe is not selfish. It is not bullying. It is not just helping you. Your amygdala, the part of the brain that processes fear, will try to convince you to give up, to flee, because the other guy is right, or you’re being cruel. But if you are an honest, decent person looking for a reasonable outcome, you can ignore the amygdala. With the style of negotiation taught in the book—an information-obsessed, empathic search for the best possible deal—you are trying to uncover value, period. Not to strong-arm or to humiliate. When I bought my red 4Runner, no doubt I disappointed the salesman by giving him a smaller payday than he would have liked. But I helped him reach his quota, and no doubt I paid more for the truck than the car lot had paid Toyota. If all I’d wanted was to “win,” to humiliate, I would have stolen the thing. And so I’m going to leave you with one request: Whether it’s in the office or around the family dinner table, don’t avoid honest, clear conflict. It will get you the best car deal and bring us unexpected success. Finding the Black Swans—those powerful unknown unknowns—is intrinsically difficult, however, for the simple reason that we don’t know the questions to ask. Because we don’t know what the treasure is, we don’t know where to dig. Here are some of the best techniques for flushing out the Black Swans—and exploiting them. Remember, your counterpart might not even know how important the information is, or even that they should reveal it. So keep pushing, probing, and gathering information. Let what you know—your known knowns—guide you but not blind you. Every case is new, so remain flexible and adaptable. Remember the Griffin bank crisis: no hostage-taker had killed a hostage on deadline, until he did. Black Swans are leverage multipliers. Remember the three types of leverage: positive (the ability to give someone what they want); negative (the ability to hurt someone); and normative (using your counterpart’s norms to bring them around). Work to understand the other side’s “religion.” Digging into worldviews inherently implies moving beyond the negotiating table and into the life, emotional and otherwise, of your counterpart. That’s where Black Swans live. Review everything you hear from your counterpart. You will not hear everything the first time, so double-check. Compare notes with team members. Use backup listeners whose job is to listen between the lines. They will hear things you miss. Exploit the similarity principle. People are more apt to concede to someone they share a cultural similarity with, so dig for what makes them tick and show that you share common ground. When someone seems irrational or crazy, they most likely aren’t. Faced with this situation, search for constraints, hidden desires, and bad information. Get face time with your counterpart. Ten minutes of face time often reveals more than days of research. Pay special attention to your counterpart's verbal and nonverbal communication at unguarded moments—at the beginning and the end of the session or when someone says something out of line. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This book would not have been possible without my son B

Random's help. Brandon has been involved in helping me shape and create these ideas since I first began teaching at Georgetown University. He was initially just there to video-record the classes but he also provided me feedback on how it was going and what was working. To be fair, he actually has been negotiating with me since he was two years old. I think I’ve known that ever since I found out he was using empathy to get out of trouble with his vice-principal in high school. 

In my first meeting with my brilliant co-writer, Tahl Raz, Brandon was there to keep the information flow going as Tahl soaked it up. In the first progress conference call with my amazing publisher, Hollis Heimbouch, Hollis asked about Brandon's role and Tahl said having Brandon around was like having another Chris in the room. Brandon has been indispensable.

Tahl Raz is a flat-out genius. Anyone who writes a business book without him hasn’t gotten as far as they could have. It’s that simple. I can’t believe how smart he is or how quickly he gets it. He is a true business-writing artist. He’s a great person as well.

Steve Ross, my agent, is a man of integrity and was perfect for this book. He has great industry knowledge and made this book happen. I am grateful to know him.

Hollis Heimbouch rocks! I am thrilled that she led the HarperCollins team and believed enough in this book to buy it. Thank you, Hollis.

Thank you, Maya Stevenson, for coming onto the Black Swan team and holding us together. We are going farther because of you.

Sheila Heen and John Richardson are two amazing people. They are the ones who really paved the way to show that these hostage negotiation ideas belong in the business world. Sheila was my teacher at Harvard Law School. She inspired me with how she taught and who she is. She asked me to teach alongside her two years later. John asked me to teach International Business Negotiation at Harvard alongside him a year after that. He guided me through that process, which led to the opportunity to become an adjunct at Georgetown. When nothing was happening for me, both John and Sheila were there. Without them I don’t know where I’d be. Thank you both.

Gary Noesner was my mentor at the FBI. He inspired and remade the hostage negotiation world (with the help of his team at the Crisis Negotiation Unit—CNU). He supported me in whatever I wanted to do. He made me the FBI’s lead international kidnapping negotiator. His support never wavered. At CNU he pulled together the most talented collection of hostage negotiators ever assembled. CNU hit its zenith when we were there. None of us knew how lucky we were. John Flood, Vince Dalfonzo, Chuck Regini, Winnie Miller, Manny Suarez, Dennis Braiden, Neil Purtell, and Steve Romano were all rock stars. I learned from you all. I can’t believe what Chuck put up with from me as my partner. Dennis was a mentor and great friend. I constantly clashed with Vince and grew because of his talent.

All those who were on the FBI Critical Incident Negotiation Team during that time taught me as well. Thank you. Tommy Corrigan and John Liguori were my brothers when I was in New York City. The three of us did extraordinary things together. I am inspired by the memory of Tommy Corrigan to this day. I was privileged to be part of his life. Both Georgetown and USC have been phenomenal places to teach. Both are truly dedicated to higher learning, the highest academic standards, and the success of their students.

The hostages and their families who allowed me in during their darkest hours to try to help are all blessed people. I am grateful to still be in touch with some of you today. What wisdom there is in the universe that decided your paths were necessary, I don’t understand. I was blessed by your grace. (I need all the help I can get.)

APPENDIX PREPARE A NEGOTIATION ONE SHEET
Negotiation is a psychological investigation. You can gain a measure of confidence going into such an investigation with a simple preparatory exercise we advise all our clients to do. Basically, it’s a list of the primary tools you anticipate using, such as labels and calibrated questions, customized to the particular negotiation.

When the pressure is on, you don’t rise to the occasion—you fall to your highest level of preparation.

One note of caution before going into greater depth on this exercise: some negotiation experts fetishize preparation to such a degree that they advise people to create the equivalent of preordained scripts for exactly how the negotiation will unfold and the exact form and substance the agreement will take on. By now, after reading this far, you’ll understand why that’s a fool’s errand. Not only will such an approach make you less agile and creative at the table, it will make you more susceptible to those who are.

Based on my company’s experiences, I believe that good initial preparation for each negotiation yields at least a 7:1 rate of return on time saved renegotiating deals or clarifying implementation.

In the entertainment industry, they have a single document that summarizes a product for publicity and sales that they call a “one sheet.” Along the same lines, we want to produce a negotiation “one sheet” that summarizes the tools we are going to use.

It will have five short sections: SECTION I: THE GOAL; SECTION II: YOUR COUNTERPART'S DESIRES AND FEARS; SECTION III: LABELING; SECTION IV: QUESTIONING; and SECTION V: CLOSING THE DEAL.

If you already have another dealer who’s given you a written offer for $10,000, that's your BATNA (Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement). The problem is that BATNA tricks negotiators into aiming low. Researchers have found that humans have a limited capacity for keeping focus in complex, stressful situations like negotiations. And so, once a negotiation is underway, we tend to gravitate toward the focus point that has the most psychological significance for us. In that context, obsessing over a BATNA turns it into your target, and thereby sets the upper limit of what you will ask for. After you've spent hours on a BATNA, you mentally concede everything beyond it.
God knows aiming low is seductive. Self-esteem is a huge factor in negotiation, and many people set modest goals to protect it. It's easier to claim victory when you aim low. That's why some negotiation experts say that many people who think they have "win-win" goals really have a "wimp-win" mentality. The "wimp-win" negotiator focuses on their bottom line, and that's where they end up.
So if BATNA isn't your centerpiece, what should be? I tell my clients as part of their preparation they should think about the outcome extremes: best and worst. If you've got both ends covered, you'll be ready for anything. So know what you cannot accept and have an idea about the best-case outcome, but keep in mind that since there's information yet to be acquired from the other side, it's quite possible that best case might be even better than you know.
Remember, never be so sure of what you want that you wouldn't take something better. Once you've got flexibility in the forefront of your mind, you come into a negotiation with a winning mindset. Let's say you're selling old speakers because you need $100 to put toward a new set. If you concentrate on the $100 minimum, you'll relax when you hear that number and that's what you'll get. But if you know they are for sale in used audio stores for $140, you could set a high-end goal of $150, while remaining open to better things.
Now, while I counsel thinking about a best/worst range to give my clients the security of some structure, when it comes to what actually goes on your one sheet, my advice is to just stick with the high-end goal, as it will motivate and focus your psychological powers, priming you to think you are facing a "loss" for any term that falls short. Decades of goal-setting research is clear that people who set specific, challenging, but realistic goals end up getting better deals than those who don't set goals or simply strive to do their best.
Bottom line: People who expect more (and articulate it) get more. Here are the four steps for setting your goal:
■ Set an optimistic but reasonable goal and define it clearly.
■ Write it down.
■ Discuss your goal with a colleague (this makes it harder to wimp out).
■ Carry the written goal into the negotiation.
SECTION II: SUMMARY
Summarize and write out in just a couple of sentences the known facts that have led up to the negotiation. You're going to have to have something to talk about beyond a self-serving assessment of what you want. And you better be ready to respond with tactical empathy to your counterpart's arguments; unless they're incompetent, their position is likely well thought out and based on valid concerns.
SECTION III: CALIBRATED QUESTIONS
Prepare three to five calibrated questions to reveal value to you and your counterpart and identify and overcome potential deal killers. Effective negotiators look past their counterparts' stated demands (what the party demands) and delve into their underlying motivations (what is making them want what they want). Motivations are what they are worried about and what they hope for, even lust for.
There will be a small group of "What" and "How" questions that you will find yourself using in nearly every situation. Here are a few of them: What are we trying to accomplish? How is that worthwhile? What's the core issue here? How does that affect things? What's the biggest challenge you face? How does this fit into what the objective is?
QUESTIONS TO IDENTIFY BEHIND-THE-TABLE DEAL KILLERS When implementation happens by committee, the support of that committee is key. You'll want to tailor your calibrated questions to identify and unearth the motivations of those behind the table, including: How does this affect the rest of your team? How on board are the people not on this call? What do your colleagues see as their main challenges in this area?
QUESTIONS TO IDENTIFY AND DIFFUSE DEAL-KILLING ISSUES Internal negotiating influence often sits with the people who are most comfortable with things as they are. Change may make them look as if they haven't been doing their job. Your dilemma in such a negotiation is how to make them look good in the face of that change.
You'll be tempted to concentrate on money, but put that aside for now. A surprisingly high percentage of negotiations hinge on something outside dollars and cents. Often they have more to do with self-esteem, status, autonomy, and other nonfinancial needs. Think about their perceived losses. Never forget that a loss stings at least twice as much as an equivalent gain. For example, the guy across the table may be more concerned about his job security than the financial implications of the deal.

ble may be hesitating to install the new accounting system he needs (and you are selling) because he doesn't want to screw anything up before his annual review in four months' time. Instead of lowering your price, you can offer to help impress his boss, and do it safely, by promising to finish the installation in ninety days, guaranteed.

QUESTIONS TO USE TO UNEARTH THE DEAL-KILLING ISSUES:
What are we up against here?
What is the biggest challenge you face?
How does making a deal with us affect things?
What happens if you do nothing?
What does doing nothing cost you?
How does making this deal resonate with what your company prides itself on?

It's often very effective to ask these questions in groups of two or three as they are similar enough that they help your counterpart think about the same thing from different angles. Every situation is unique, of course, but choosing the right mix of these questions will lead your counterpart to reveal information about what they want and need—and simultaneously push them to see things from your point of view. Be ready to execute follow-up labels to their answers to your calibrated questions. Having labels prepared will allow you to quickly turn their responses back to them, which will keep them feeding you new and expanding information. Again, these are fill-in-the-blank labels that you can use quickly without tons of thought:

It seems like _____ is important.
It seems you want to ______.
It seems like your biggest concern is ______.

PAGES FOR INDEXING:
Abu Sayyaf (militant Islamic group), 96, 99, 100, 140, 142-44
Accommodators (bargaining style), 192, 194-96
accusation audit, 19, 64-68, 73, 128, 182-83, 254-55
example, contract negotiation, 65-68
Ackerman, Mike, 205-6
Ackerman model, 21, 205-8, 212, 240
example, getting a rent cut, 208-11
four steps of, 206
Haitian kidnappings and, 207-8
active listening, 16, 19, 53. See also tactical empathy BCSM and, 97
crisis negotiations and, 225
difficulty of listening, 27-28
effective pauses, 103
focusing on the other person, 28, 47
labeling and, 103
mirroring and, 19, 103
paraphrasing and, 103
Schilling kidnapping case and, 102-4
silences, 19, 103
summaries, 103

“I”	messages,	203–4
evidence-based	argument,	67–69,	72
expertise,	19,	55,	67–69,	72
	reasons	for,	68
FBI,	16.	
See	also
	crisis	negotiation	techniques;	evidence-based	argument
Fear	factors,	55,	61,	62,	94
fear	of	rejection,	78–79,	80,	85–86
finance.	
See	also
	 car-buying	negotiations;	 negotiation	strategies
First	Do No Harm:	 Stories of Life in the Emergency Room
(Travis),	134
force	of	authority,	78,	80,	92–95,	169–70
Gelb,	Thomas,	121–22
gender,	49,	119
George	Bush	Jr.,	133
Golden	Rule,	78
goodwill,	21
Greater	Good	Foundation,	136
Gregory	discount,	179–80
Harlem	standoff,	49–51,	54–55
Hillary	Clinton,	53
hostage	mentality,	159
How/No	questions,	167–68
Iranian	sanctions,	123–24
Japanese	regulating	technique,	159
kidnapping	negotiations,	 4–5,	 9–10,	 13–16,	 18–19,	 54.	
See	 also
	 crisis	 negotiations;	 Harlem	stand-off
	 Voss	and,	76
Lakshmanan,	Krishna,	127
labeling,	50,	54–73
leadership,	 9–10,	 18–19,	 53.	
See	also
	crisis	negotiation	techniques;	evidence-based	argument
LeBron	James,	149
Lee,	William,	76,	110,	112–14,	138,	155–56
legitimate	needs,	84
Lieberman,	Joe,	53
lying,	176,	179
Manhattan	Criminal	Court,	10
Marschall,	Steven,	76,	127–28
maximizing	options,	115–16,	139
McGinn,	Patricia,	127–28
merits,	19,	55,	67–69,	72
Messick,	Barry,	127
minimizing	losses,	204
Miyamoto,	Hiroshi,	134
monetary	reward,	55,	118
negotiation
	active	listening	in,	49,	51–52,	53
	assertive	voice,	32–33,	48
	empathy	in,	49–50,	51–52,	70
	evidence-based	argument	in,	67–69,	72
	force	of	authority	in,	78,	80,	92–95,	169–70
	hostage	mentality	and,	159
	Hillary	Clinton	and,	53
	Iranian	sanctions	and,	123–24
	Japanese	regulating	technique,	159
	labeling	and,	68
	negotiation	strategies	in,	115–16,	139
	primal	needs	and,	84
	rapport	based	on,	70
	Voss	and,	76
Negative	outcome,	62,	63
neural	resonance	and,	53
Newmark,	Bob,	133
No/How	questions,	167–68
non-zero	sum,	115–16,	139
O’Donnell,	Daniel,	129
openness,	19,	55,	67–69,	72
optimal	outcome,	62,	63
primal	needs,	84
psychology.	
See	also
	prospect	theory;	tactical	empathy
Rachel’s	yammering,	129
Reagan,	Ronald,	53
rejection,	78–79,	80,	85–86
respect,	204
reward,	55,	118
risk,	204
role-playing,	110,	112–14,	138
Ross,	Jack,	137–39
salami	slicing,	116–120,	139
Schaefer,	Sheryl,	128–29
Sean-Patrick	Lawrence,	53
self-control,	156–59,	161
Sharon,	Ariel,	53
significant	benefit,	117
Skelton,	Joe,	53
social	contract,	10
Steinmetz,	Walter,	54–55
stress,	49–50
subtleties,	spotting	and	interpreting,	173–76
superiority	complex,	84
Tactical	empathy,	 15,	 52.	
See	also
	 empathy;	 tactical	questioning
Tallarico,	Joe,	129
temptation,	55–60,	73
Thaler,	Richard,	127
Thomas,	Lee,	110,	112–14,	138
Travis,	Michael,	134
Ultimatum	Game,	121–22
United	States	vs.	Downs,	10
Watson	standoff,	224–28
Williams,	Robin,	123
Wolinsky,	David,	134
Yeager,	Randy,	155–56

neglecting	the	other	person’s	emotions,	54–73
	having	an	open	mind	and	listening	actively,	38
	meeting	their	expectations	and	needs,	91
	negotiation	styles	(Assertive,	Collaborative,	Competitive)	and,	192–94
	overcoming	cognitive	biases	and	limitations,	257
	recognizing	the	other	person’s	communication	style	and,	48–50
	using	“fair”	in	negotiations	and,	125
Newman,	David,	139
nonverbal	communication.	
See
	mirroring;	
nonviolent	communication.	
See
	active	listening
Nussbaum,	Barbara,	140
Ong

7-38-55 Percent Rule: A negotiation technique that involves pausing for 7 seconds to think about the other party's point of view before responding.

Analysts: A bargaining style characterized by careful listening, patience, and a focus on understanding the other person's perspective.

Assertive: A bargaining style characterized by directness, assertiveness, and the willingness to stand up for one's own interests.

Blind Sheikh: The nickname of Omar Abdel-Rahman, an Egyptian cleric who was convicted in 1995 for his involvement in the World Trade Center bombing.

Bluffing: An attempt to negotiate a better outcome by pretending to have more power or authority than one actually does.

Bull in a China Shop Bargaining Style: A bargaining style characterized by emotional outbursts, aggressive behavior, and a lack of concern for the feelings of others.

Cooperative: A bargaining style characterized by a focus on finding common ground, building rapport, and reaching mutually beneficial agreements.

Contract Discussion: A conversation in which the parties involved negotiate the terms and conditions of an agreement or contract.

Director Assertive Voice: A voice tone that is assertive, clear, and direct when making requests or expressing needs.

Directors: A bargaining style characterized by strong leadership, decisiveness, and a focus on achieving results quickly.

Dominators: A bargaining style characterized by the use of power and control to get what one wants from others.

Empathy: The ability to understand and share the feelings of another person.

Fake Anger: A negotiation tactic in which a negotiator pretends to be angry or upset in order to intimidate the other party and gain an advantage.

Fighting Style: A bargaining style characterized by an emphasis on competition, winning, and asserting one's own interests at the expense of the other person's needs.

Four Step Process: A negotiation technique that involves stating one's position, acknowledging the other party's position, finding common ground, and reaching a mutually beneficial agreement.

How Questions: Open-ended questions that encourage the listener to elaborate on their thoughts and feelings.

Interest-Based Bargaining Style: A bargaining style characterized by a focus on identifying and addressing the underlying needs and interests of both parties in order to reach a mutually beneficial agreement.

Late-Night FM DJ Voice: A voice tone that is warm, friendly, and conversational, similar to the way a late-night FM DJ might speak with listeners.

Labeling: The act of identifying and addressing potential barriers or concerns in a negotiation.

Mirroring: The act of repeating back the words or phrases used by the other party as a way of building rapport, understanding their perspective, and fostering empathy.

Nice Guys: A bargaining style characterized by a focus on being polite, friendly, and accommodating in order to avoid conflict and maintain harmony with others.

Omar Abdel-Rahman: An Egyptian cleric who was convicted in 1995 for his involvement in the World Trade Center bombing. He was also involved in other acts of terrorism, including the attempted assassination of President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and the bombing of the UN building in New York City.

Oprah Winfrey: An American television host, entrepreneur, and philanthropist who has been dubbed "the Queen of All Media." She is known for her popular talk show, The Oprah Winfrey Show, which aired from 1986 to 2011.

Pause Technique: A negotiation technique that involves pausing for a few seconds before responding in order to gather one's thoughts and maintain control of the conversation.

Price Negotiations: Discussions in which the parties involved attempt to reach an agreement on the price or value of a product, service, or other item.

Rapport: The feeling of connection, trust, and mutual understanding that develops between two people as they interact with each other.

Rule of Three: A negotiation technique that involves presenting three options for consideration instead of just one.

Scripts: Written statements or guides that are used to help negotiators structure their conversations, present their arguments effectively, and achieve their desired outcomes.

Soft Power: The ability to influence others through persuasion, attraction, and example rather than coercion or force.

Tactical Empathy: A negotiation technique that involves using empathy strategically to build rapport, understand the other party's perspective, and gain a negotiating advantage.

Unbelief: The feeling of disbelief or incredulity that can be experienced when confronted with information that contradicts one's beliefs or expectations.

(1993), 99
Yes, Ediborah, 145
"Yes"
achieving consent, 164
analyzing the entire negotiation space (the team), 170-71
commitment, 80, 81, 83, 177
confirmation, 80, 81, 177
counterfeit, 80-81, 84, 85, 177
defensiveness and, 86, 94
discomfort and, 86
"How" necessary with, 164-69, 186
Rule of Three and, 177-78, 186
using too early, 86, 94, 112
You Can Negotiate Anything (Cohen), 119
ZOPA (Zone of Possible Agreement), 8, 198, 199

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
CHRIS VOSS is one of the preeminent practitioners and professors of negotiating skills in the world. He currently teaches at both the University of Southern California's Marshall School of Business and Georgetown University's McDonough School of Business. Chris has lectured at many other preeminent universities, including Harvard Law School, the Sloan School of Management, and the Kellogg School of Management. He lives in Los Angeles, California.
TAHL RAZ uncovers big ideas and great stories that ignite change and growth in people and organizations. He is an award-winning journalist and coauthor of the New York Times bestseller Never Eat Alone. When not researching or writing, he coaches executives, lectures widely on the forces transforming the new world of work, and serves as an editorial consultant for several national firms. He invites readers to e-mail him at tr@tahlraz.com and to visit his website at www.tahlraz.com.
Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.
CREDITS
COVER DESIGN BY JARROD TAYLOR
COPYRIGHT The opinions expressed in this book are sole­ly those of the author, and not of the FBI.
NEVER SPLIT THE DIFFERENCE.
Copyright © 2016 by Christopher Voss. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
FIRST EDITION
ISBN: 978-0-06-240780-1
Epub Edition MAY 2016 ISBN: 9780062407818