Some deals have ZOPAs and some don't. It's all very rational. Or so they'd have you think. You need to disabuse yourself of that notion. In a real bargaining session, kick-ass negotiators don't use ZOPA. Experienced negotiators often lead with a ridiculous offer, an extreme anchor. And if you're not prepared to handle it, you'll lose your moorings and immediately go to your maximum. It's human nature. Like the great ear-biting pugilist Mike Tyson once said, "Everybody has a plan until they get punched in the mouth." As a well-prepared negotiator who seeks information and gathers it relentlessly, you're actually going to want the other guy to name a price first, because you want to see his hand. You're going to welcome the extreme anchor. But extreme anchoring is powerful and you're human: your emotions may well up. If they do there are ways to weather the storm without bidding against yourself or responding with anger. Once you learn these tactics, you'll be prepared to withstand the hit and counter with panache. First, deflect the punch in a way that opens up your counterpart. Successful negotiators often say "No" in one of the many ways we've talked about ("How am I supposed to accept that?") or deflect the anchor with questions like "What are we trying to accomplish here?" Responses like these are great ways to refocus your counterpart when you feel you're being pulled into the compromise trap. You can also respond to a punch-in-the-face anchor by simply pivoting to terms. What I mean by this is that when you feel you're being dragged into a haggle, you can detour the conversation to the nonmonetary issues that make any final price work. You can do this directly by saying, in an encouraging tone of voice, "Let's put price off to the side for a moment and talk about what would make this a good deal." Or you could go at it more obliquely by asking, "What else would you be able to offer to make that a good price for me?" And if the other side pushes you to go first, wriggle from his grip. Instead of naming a price, allude to an incredibly high number that someone else might charge. Once when a hospital chain wanted me to name a price first, I said, "Well, if you go to Harvard Business School, they're going to charge you $2,500 a day per student." No matter what happens, the point here is to sponge up information from your counterpart. Letting your counterpart anchor first will give you a tremendous feel for him. All you need to learn is how to take the first punch. One of my Georgetown MBA students, a guy named Farouq, showed how not to fold after being punched when he went to hit up the MBA dean for funds to hold a big alumni event in Dubai. It was a desperate situation because he needed $600 and she was his last stop. At the meeting, Farouq told the dean about how excited the students were about the event and said that he needed her help. The dean was initially reluctant but eventually agreed to give him $500. However, Farouq wasn't satisfied with this amount. He knew that he could get more money if he showed her that he was serious about this project. So, he asked her for an additional $100. The dean was hesitant at first but eventually agreed to give him the extra money. This was a great example of how you can use the art of negotiation to get what you want. Farouq didn't just accept the initial offer; he pushed back and asked for more. And in the end, he got it. This is why it's so important to learn the skills of negotiation. It can make a huge difference in your life. When a negotiation is far from resolution and going nowhere fast, you need to shake things up and get your counterpart out of their rigid mindset. Strong moves can be enormously effective tools. Sometimes a situation simply calls for you to be the aggressor and punch the other side in the face. That said, if you are basically a nice person, it will be a real stretch to hit the other guy like Mike Tyson. You can't be what you're not. As the Danish folk saying goes, "You bake with the flour you have." But anyone can learn a few tools. Here are effective ways to assert smartly: REAL ANGER, THREATS WITHOUT ANGER, AND STRATEGIC UMBRAGE Marwan Sinaceur of INSEAD and Stanford University's Larissa Tiedens found that expressions of anger increase a negotiator's advantage and final take. Anger shows passion and conviction that can help sway the other side to accept less. However, by heightening your counterpart's sensitivity to danger and fear, your anger reduces the resources they have for other cognitive activity, setting them up to make bad concessions that will likely lead to implementation problems, thus reducing your gains. Also beware: researchers have also found that disingenuous expressions of unfelt anger - you know, faking it - backfire, leading to intractable demands and destroying trust. For anger to be effective, it has to be real, the key for it is to be under control because anger also reduces our cognitive ability. And so when someone puts out a ridiculous offer, one that really pisses you off, take a deep breath, allow little anger, and channel it - at the proposal, not the person - and say, "I don't see how that would ever work." Such well-timed offense-taking - known as "strategic umbrage" - can wake your counterpart to the problem. In studies by Columbia University academics Daniel Ames and Abbie Wazlawek, people on the receiving end of strategic umbrage were more likely to rate themselves as overassertive, even when the counterpart didn't think so. The real lesson here is being aware of how this might be used on you. Please don't allow yourself to fall victim to "strategic umbrage." Threats delivered without anger but with "poise" - that is, confidence and self-control - are great tools. Saying, "I'm sorry that just doesn't work for me," with poise, works. "Why?" questions Back in Chapter 7, I talked about the problems with "Why?" Across our planet and around the universe, "Why?" makes people defensive. As an experiment, the next time your boss wants something done ask him or her "Why?" and watch what happens.