in	our	personal	lives	are	actually	a	series	of	 negotiations,
where	we	try	to	convince	others	of	our	ideas,	 get	them	to	do	what	we	want,	and	manage	disputes.
Just	like	in	hostage	negotiations,	we	deal	with	people	who	are	
emotionally	driven,	irrational,	or	oppositional.	And	just	like	the	hostage-taker,	
we’re	often	trying	to	get	something	from	other	people	that	they	don’t	
want	to	give	up.
In	other	words,	we’re	all	in	the	same	boat.	 We’re	all	
struggling	to	navigate	complex	emotional	environments,	and	we’re	all
trying	to	figure	out	what	it	takes	to	get	people	to	do	what	we	
want.
So	if	you	ever	find	yourself	in	a	situation	where	you’re	
struggling	to	connect	with	someone,	or	you’re	trying	to	convince	
them	of	your	point	of	view,	or	you’re	stuck	in	a	dispute	that’s
getting	nowhere,	know	this:	 You	are	not	alone.	 This	is	real-life
negotiation.	 And	if	you	know	how	to	harness	the	power	of	
emotional	intelligence,	you	can	increase	your	chances	of	success.
So	let’s	start	with	the	basics:	 If	you	want	to	get	other	people	
to	listen	to	what	you	have	to	say,	 you	need	to	demonstrate	
empathy.
And	it	all	begins	with	listening.	 By	listening	intensely,	 a
negotiator	demonstrates	 empathy	and	shows	a	sincere	desire	to	better	
understand	what	the	other	side	is	experiencing.
Psychotherapy	research	shows	that	when	individuals	feel
listened	 to,	 they	tend	to	listen	to	themselves	more	carefully
and	to	openly	evaluate	 and	clarify	their	own	thoughts	and
feelings.	In	addition,	they	tend	to	become	less	defensive	and
oppositional	 and	more	willing	to	listen	to	other	points	of	view,
which	gets	them	to	the	calm	and	logical	place	where	they	can	be
good	Getting	to	Yes	problem	solvers.
The	whole	concept,	which	you’ll	learn	as	the	centerpiece
of	this	book,	is	called	
Tactical	Empathy
.	This	is	listening	as
a	 martial	 art,	 balancing	 the	 subtle	behaviors	of	emotional
intelligence	and	the	assertive	skills	of	influence,	to	gain
access	to	the	mind	of	another	person.	 Contrary	 to	popular
opinion,	listening	is	not	a	passive	activity.	 It	is	the	most
active	thing	you	can	do.