The clerk, you're asking for their advice and giving them the illusion of control. Asking for help in this manner, after already being engaged in a dialogue, is an incredibly powerful negotiating technique for transforming encounters from confrontational showdowns into joint problem-solving sessions. Calibrated questions are the best tool.

A few years ago, I was consulting with a client who had a small firm that did public relations for a large corporation. The folks at the big company were not paying their bills, and as time went on, they owed my client more and more money. They kept her on the hook by promising lots of repeat business, implying that she would get a pile of revenue if she just kept working. She felt trapped.

My advice for her was simple: I told her to engage them in a conversation where she summarized the situation and then asked, "How am I supposed to do that?" She shook her head. No way. The idea of having to ask this question just terrified her. "If they tell me I have to, then I'm trapped!" was her reaction.

She also heard the question as "You're screwing me out of money and it has to stop." That sounded like the first step to her getting fired as a consultant. I explained to her that this implication, though real, was in her mind. Her client would hear the words and not the implication as long as she kept calm and avoided making it sound by her delivery like an accusation or threat. As long as she stayed cool, they would hear it as a problem to be solved.

She didn't quite believe me. We walked through the script several times, but she was still afraid. Then a few days later, she called me, totally giddy with happiness. The client had called with another request and she had finally gotten up the courage to summarize the situation, and ask, "How am I supposed to do that?" And you know what? The answer she got was "You're right, you can't and I apologize." Her client explained that they were going through some internal problems, but she was given a new accounting contact and told she'd be paid within forty-eight hours. She was.

Now, think about how my client's question worked: without accusing them of anything, it pushed the big company to understand her problem and offer the solution she wanted. That in a nutshell is the whole point of open-ended questions that are calibrated for a specific effect.