building hallway, the two FBI negotiating students and I took turns speaking. We rotated in order to avoid verbal stumbles and other errors caused by tiredness. And we stayed relentlessly on message, all three of us saying the same thing. Now, pay close attention to exactly what we said: "It looks like you don't want to come out. It seems like you worry that if you open the door, we'll come in with guns blazing. It looks like you don't want to go back to jail." We employed our tactical empathy by recognizing and then verbalizing the predictable emotions of the situation. We didn't just put ourselves in the fugitives' shoes. We spotted their feelings, turned them into words, and then very calmly and respectfully repeated their emotions back to them. In a negotiation, that's called labeling. Labeling is a way of validating someone's emotion by acknowledging it. Give someone's emotion a name and you show you identify with how that person feels. It gets you close to someone without asking about external factors you know nothing about ("How's your family?"). Think of labeling as a shortcut to intimacy, a time-saving emotional hack. Labeling has a special advantage when your counterpart is tense. Exposing negative thoughts to daylight— "It looks like you don't want to go back to jail" —makes them seem less frightening. In one brain imaging study, psychology professor Matthew Lieberman of the University of California, Los Angeles, found that when people are shown photos of faces expressing strong emotion, the brain shows greater activity in the amygdala, the part that generates fear. But when they are asked to label the emotion, the activity moves to the areas that govern rational thinking. In other words, labeling an emotion—applying rational words to a fear—disrupts its raw intensity. Labeling is a simple, versatile skill that lets you reinforce a good aspect of the negotiation, or diffuse a negative one. But it has very specific rules about form and delivery. That makes it less like chatting than like a formal art such as Chinese calligraphy. For most people, it's one of the most awkward negotiating tools to use. Before they try it the first time, my students almost always tell me they expect their counterpart to jump up and shout, "Don't you dare tell me how I feel!" Let me let you in on a secret: people never even notice. The first step to labeling is detecting the other person's emotional state. Outside that door in Harlem we couldn't even see the fugitives, but most of the time you'll have a wealth of information from the other person's words, tone, and body language. We call that trinity "words, music, and dance." The trick to spotting feelings is to pay close attention to changes people undergo when they respond to external events. Most often, those events are your words. If you say, "How is the family?" and the corners of the other party's mouth turn down even when they say it's great, you might detect that all is not well; if their voice goes flat when a colleague is mentioned, there could be a problem between the two; and if your landlord unconsciously fidgets his feet when you mention the neighbors, it's pretty clear that he doesn't think much of them (we'll dig deeper into how to spot and use these cues in Chapter 9). Picking up on these tiny pieces of information is how psychics work. They size up their client's body language and ask him a few innocent questions. When they "tell" his future a few minutes later, they don't say that was what it was. They just said it seems like that. The last rule of labeling is silence. Once you've thrown out a label, be quiet and listen. We all have a tendency to expand on what we've said, to finish, "It seems like you like the way that shirt looks," with a specific question like "Where did you get it?" A label's power is that it invites the other person to reveal himself. If you'll trust me for a second, take a break now and try it out: Strike up a conversation and put a label on one of the other person's emotions—it doesn't matter if you're talking to the mailman or your ten-year-old daughter—and then go silent. Let the label do its work. Labeling is a tactic, not a strategy, in the same way a spoon is a great tool for stirring soup but it's not a recipe. How you use labeling will go a long way in determining your success. Deployed well, it's how we as negotiators identify and then slowly alter the inner voices of our counterpart's consciousness to something more collaborative and trusting.