The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts. Repair it into clean, readable English. Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
	best	price.
OLD-SCHOOL	NEGOTIATION
Hostage	 taking—and	 therefore	 hostage	 negotiating—has
existed	since	the	dawn	of	recorded	time.	The	Old	Testament
spins	 plenty	 of	 tales	 of	 Israelites	 and	 their	 enemies	 taking
each	other’s	citizens	hostage	as	spoils	of	war.	The	Romans,
for	 their	 part,	 used	 to	 force	 the	 princes	 of	 vassal	 states	 to
send	 their	 sons	 to	 Rome	 for	 their	 education,	 to	 ensure	 the
continued	loyalty	of	the	princes.
But	 until	 the	 Nixon	 administration,	 hostage	 negotiating
as	 a	 process	 was	 limited	 to	 sending	 in	 troops	 and	 trying	 to
shoot	 the	 hostages	 free.	 In	 law	 enforcement,	 our	 approach
was	 pretty	 much	 to	 talk	 until	 we	 figured	 out	 how	 to	 take
them	out	with	a	gun.	Brute	force.
Then	a	series	of	hostage	disasters	forced	us	to	change.
In	1971,	thirty-nine	hostages	were	killed	when	the	police
tried	 to	 resolve	 the	Attica	 prison	 riots	 in	 upstate	 New	York
with	 guns.	 Then	 at	 the	 1972	 Olympics	 in	 Munich,	 eleven
Israeli	 athletes	 and	 coaches	 were	 killed	 by	 their	 Palestinian
captors	after	a	botched	rescue	attempt	by	the	German	police.
But	 the	 greatest	 inspiration	 for	 institutional	 change	 in
American	law	 enforcement	 came	 on	 an	 airport	 tarmac	 in
Jacksonville,	Florida,	on	October	4,	1971.
The	 United	 States	 was	 experiencing	 an	 epidemic	 of
airline	 hijackings	 at	 the	 time;	 there	 were	 five	 in	 one	 three-
day	 period	 in	 1970.	 It	 was	 in	 that	 charged	 atmosphere	 that:%.*an	 unhinged	 man	 named	 George	 Giffe	 Jr.	 hijacked	 a
chartered	 plane	 out	 of	 Nashville,	 Tennessee,	 planning	 to
head	to	the	Bahamas.
By	 the	 time	 the	 incident	 was	 over,	 Giffe	 had	 murdered
two	 hostages—his	 estranged	 wife	 and	 the	 pilot—and	 killed
himself	to	boot.
But	 this	 time	 the	 blame	 didn’t	 fall	 on	 the	 hijacker;
instead,	 it	 fell	 squarely	 on	 the	 FBI.	 Two	 hostages	 had
managed	 to	 convince	 Giffe	 to	 let	 them	 go	 on	 the	 tarmac	 in
Jacksonville,	where	they’d	stopped	to	
refuel.	But	the	agents
had	gotten	impatient	and	shot	out	the	engine.	And	that	had
pushed	Giffe	to	the	nuclear	option.
In	 fact,	 the	 blame	 placed	 on	 the	 FBI	 was	 so	 strong	 that
when	the	pilot’s	wife	and	Giffe’s	daughter	filed	a	wrongful
death	suit	alleging	FBI	negligence,	the	courts	agreed.
This	incident	marked	a	turning	point	in	how	law	enforcement	and	hostage
negotiators	approached	their	jobs.	 The	traditional	approach	was	to	use	brute
force,	but	this	had	been	proven	ineffective.	 Instead,	a	new	approach	called
crisis	negotiation	began	to	gain	popularity.	 This	method	relied	on	talking	the
hijacker	down	and	persuading	him	to	surrender.
One	of	the	pioneers	in	this	new	field	was	former	FBI	hostage
negotiator	George	Fouche	Jr.	He	established	the	Crisis	Negotiation	Institute	and	wrote	a	book	on	the	subject,	"Prescription	for	Hostage	Rescue."
The	concept	of	crisis	negotiation	was	simple:	 hostage	takers	were	not	always	after
money.	 Often,	they	were	seeking	attention,	revenge,	or	justice.	 By	meeting	these	needs,	hostage
negotiators	could	prevent	violence	and	resolve	crises	peacefully.
This	new	approach	worked	wonders.	 Between	1970	and	1980,	only	one	U.S.	hostage	died	in	a	situation	where	these	negotiation	techniques	were	used.
Today,	crisis	negotiators	are	trained	to	understand	human	nature	and	how	it	can	be	exploited	in	a	situation.	 They	learn	to	empathize	with	their	subjects,	finding	common	ground	and	building	rapport.
The	success	of	crisis	negotiation	led	to	its	application	in	other	areas	such	as	business,	politics,	and	personal	relationships.	 It	has	become	a	valuable	tool	for	mediating	conflict	and	building	stronger	bonds.
The	crisis	negotiation	approach	can	be	summed	up	in	three	simple	steps:
1)	Understand	the	needs	of	the	other	party.
2)	Build	rapport	and	trust.
3)	Reach	a	resolution	that	meets	both	parties'	needs.
This	method	has	been	proven	time	and	again	to	be	effective	in	dealing	with	crisis	situations.	 It	has	become	a	core	principle	of	conflict	resolution	and	mediation.