You can imagine the drama that started when Dwight Watson, a North Carolina tobacco grower, hooked up his jeep to a John Deere tractor festooned with banners and an inverted U.S. flag and towed it to Washington, D.C., to protest government policies he thought were putting tobacco farmers out of business.

When Watson got to the capital, he pulled his tractor into a pond between the Washington Monument and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and threatened to blow it up with the "organophosphate" bombs he claimed were inside. The capital went into lockdown as the police blocked off an eight-block area from the Lincoln Memorial to the Washington Monument. Coming just months after the Beltway sniper attacks and alongside the buildup to the Iraq War, the ease with which Watson threw the nation's capital into turmoil freaked people out.

Talking on his cell phone, Watson told the Washington Post that he was on a do-or-die mission to show how reduced subsidies were killing tobacco farmers. He told the Post that God had instructed him to stage his protest and he wasn't going to leave. "If this is the way America will be run, the hell with it," he said. "I will not surrender. They can blow [me] out of the water. I'm ready to go to heaven."

The FBI deployed me to a converted RV on the National Mall, where I was to guide a team of FBI agents and U.S. Park Police as we tried to talk Watson out of killing himself and who knows how many others. And then we got down to business. Like you'd expect of a negotiation with a guy threatening to destroy a good part of the U.S. capital, it was righteously tense. Sharpshooters had their weapons trained on Watson, and they had the "green light" to shoot if he made any crazy moves.

In any negotiation, but especially in a tense one like this, it's not how well you speak but how well you listen that determines your success. Understanding the "other" is a precondition to be able to speak persuasively and develop options that resonate for them. There is the visible negotiation and then all the things that are hidden under the surface (the secret negotiation space wherein the Black Swans dwell).

Access to this hidden space very often comes through understanding the other side's worldview, their reason for being, their religion. Indeed, digging into your counterpart's "religion" (sometimes involving God but not always) inherently implies moving beyond the negotiating table and into the life, emotional and otherwise, of your counterpart.

Once you've understood your counterpart's worldview, you can build influence. That's why as we talked with Watson I spent my energy trying to unearth who he was rather than logically arguing him into surrender. From this we learned that Watson had been finding it increasingly hard to make a living on his 1,200-acre tobacco farm, which had been in his family for five generations. After being hit by a drought and having his crop quota cut by half, Watson decided he couldn't afford the farm anymore and drove to Washington to make his point. He wanted attention, and knowing what he wanted gave us positive leverage.

Watson also told us he was a veteran, and veterans had rules. This is the kind of music you want to hear, as it provides normative leverage. He told us that he would be willing to surrender but not right away. As a military police officer in the 82nd Airborne in the 1970s, he believed that if Christ came out on the Dawn of the Third Day, why not him?

It was a brilliant use of deep listening. By combining that subtext of Watson's words with knowledge of his worldview she let us show Watson that we not only were listening but had also heard him. If we'd understood his subtext correctly, this would let him end the standoff honorably and do so with the feeling that he was surrendering to an adversary that respected him and his beliefs.

By positioning your demands within the worldview your counterpart uses to make decisions, you show them respect and that gets you attention and results. Knowing your counterpart's religion is more than just gaining normative leverage per se. Rather, it's gaining a holistic understanding of your counterpart's worldview—in this case, literally a religion—and using that knowledge to inform your negotiating moves.

Using your counterpart's religion is extremely effective in large part because it has authority over them. The other guy's "religion" is what the market, the experts, God, or society—whatever matters to him—has determined to be fair and just. And people defer to that authority.

In the next conversation with Watson, we mentioned that the next morning was the Dawn of the Third Day. There was a long moment of silence on the other end of the line. Our Negotiation Operation Center was so quiet you could hear the heartbeat of the guy next to you. Watson coughed. "I'll come out," he said. And he did, ending a forty-eight-hour standoff.