These unknowns are Black Swans. With their known knowns and prior expectations so firmly guiding their approach, Van Zandt and really the entire FBI were blind to the clues and connections that showed there was something outside of the predictable at play. They couldn't see the Black Swans in front of them.
I don't mean to single out Van Zandt here. He did all of law enforcement a service by highlighting this event and he told me and a room full of agents the story of that horrible June day during a training session at Quantico. It was an introduction to the suicide-by-cop phenomenon—when an individual deliberately creates a crisis situation to provoke a lethal response from law enforcement—but there was an even greater lesson at stake: the point of the story then, and now, was how important it is to recognize the unexpected to make sure things like Moore's death never happen again.
On that day in June 1981, O'Brien kept calling the bank, but each time the bank employee who answered quickly hung up. It was at that moment they should have realized the situation was outside of the known. Hostage-takers always talked because they always had demands; they always wanted to be heard, respected, and paid. But this guy didn't.
Then, midway through the standoff, a police officer entered the command post with the news that a double homicide with a third person critically wounded had been reported a few blocks away. "Do we need to know this?" Van Zandt said. "Is there a connection?" No one knew or found out in time. If they had, they might have uncovered a second Black Swan: that Griffin had already killed several people without making monetary demands.
And then, a few hours in, the hostage-taker had one of the hostages read a note to the police over the phone. Curiously, there were no demands. Instead, it was a rambling diatribe about Griffin's life and the wrongs he'd endured. The note was so long and unfocused it was never read in its entirety. Because of this, one important line—another Black Swan—wasn't registered: ". . after the police take my life . . ." Because these Black Swans weren't uncovered, Van Zandt and his colleagues never saw the situation for what it was: Griffin wanted to die, and he wanted the police to do it for him.
Nothing like this—a shootout on a deadline?—had ever happened to the FBI, so they tried to fit the information into what had happened in the past. Into the old templates. They wondered, What does he actually want? After scaring them for a bit, they expected Griffin to pick up the phone and start a dialogue. No one gets killed on deadline. Or so they thought.
The lesson of what happened at 3 p.m. on June 17, 1981, in Rochester, New York, was that when bits and pieces of a case don't add up, it's usually because our frames of reference are off; they will never add up unless we break free of our expectations. Every case is new. We must let what we know—our known knowns—guide us but not blind us to what we do not know; we must remain flexible and adaptable to any situation; we must always retain a beginner's mind; and we must never overvalue our experience or undervalue the informational and emotional realities served up moment by moment in whatever situation we face.
But those were not the only important lessons of that tragic event. If an overreliance on known knowns can blind a negotiator to assumptions that prevent him from seeing and hearing all that a situation presents, then perhaps an enhanced receptivity to the unknown unknowns can free that same negotiator to see and hear the things that can produce dramatic breakthroughs.
From the moment I walked into the room, my heart began to race. I had no idea what to expect or how to proceed. The atmosphere was tense, and I could feel everyone's eyes on me. As I spoke, I tried to focus on the task at hand: listening intently for any clues that might reveal something unexpected.
Negotiations will always suffer from limited predictability. Your counterpart may tell you, "It's a lovely plot of land," without mentioning that it is also a Superfund site. They'll say, "Are the neighbors noisy? Well, everyone makes a bit of noise, don't they?" when the actual fact is that a heavy metal band practices there nightly.
It is the person best able to uncover, adapt to, and exploit the unknowns that will come out on top. To uncover these unknowns, we must interrogate our world, put out a call, and intensely listen to the response. Ask lots of questions. Read nonverbal clues and always voice your observations with your counterpart.
This is nothing beyond what you've been learning up to now. It is merely more intense and intuitive. You have to feel for the truth behind the camouflage; you have to note the small pauses that suggest discomfort and lies. Don't look to verify what you expect. If you do, that's what you'll find.
Instead, you must open yourself up to the factual reality that is in front of you. This is why my company changed its format for preparing and engaging in a negotiation. No matter how much research our team has done prior to the interaction, we always ask ourselves, "Why are they communicating what they are communicating right now?" Remember, negotiation is more like walking on a tightrope than competing against an opponent. Focusing so much on the end objective will only distract you from the next step, and that can cause you to fall off the rope. Concentrate on the next step because the rope will lead you