Just remember,” Julie said, “no matter what happens, I love you.”
“Don’t worry. I'll be fine,” José answered. And then he and his captors disappeared into the jungle. The captors wanted $5 million. We wanted to buy time. Ever since the Dos Palmas debacle and the Pittsburgh epiphany, I had been raring to employ the lessons we’d learned about calibrated questions. So when José was kidnapped, I sent my guys down to Ecuador and told them that we had a new strategy. The kidnapping would provide an opportunity to prove this approach.
“All we're going to say is, ‘Hey, how do we know José is okay? How are we supposed to pay until we know José is okay?’ Again and again,” I told them. Although they were queasy about untested techniques, my guys were game. The local cops were livid, though, because they always did proof of life the old-fashioned way (which the FBI had taught them in the first place). Luckily Julie was with us 100 percent because she saw how the calibrated questions would stall for time, and she was convinced that with enough time her husband would find a way to get home.
The day after the kidnapping, the rebels marched José into the mountains along the Colombian border and settled in a cabin high in the jungle. There José built a rapport with the kidnappers to make himself harder for them to kill. He impressed them with his knowledge of the jungle and, with a black belt in karate, he filled the time by teaching them martial arts.
My negotiators coached Julie every day as we waited for contact from the rebels. We learned later that the designated negotiator from José’s captors had to walk to town to negotiate by phone. My guys told Julie to answer every one of the kidnappers’ demands with a question. My strategy was to keep the kidnappers engaged but off balance.
“How do I know José is alive?” she asked the first time they talked. To their demand for $5 million, she said, “We don't have that kind of money. How can we raise that much?” “How can we pay you anything until we know José is okay?” Julie asked the next time they talked. Questions, always questions.
The kidnapper who was negotiating with Julie seemed extremely perplexed by her persistent questions, and he kept asking for time to think. That slowed everything down, but he never got angry with Julie. Answering questions gave him the illusion that he had control of the negotiation. By constantly asking questions and making minuscule offers, Julie drove the ransom down to $16,500. When they came to that number, the kidnappers demanded she get it to them immediately.
“How can I do that when I have to sell my cars and trucks?” she asked. Always buying more time. We were starting to grin because success was within reach; we were really close to a ransom that the family could afford. And then I got a phone call in the middle of the night from one of my deployed guys in Ecuador, Kevin Rust. Kevin is a terrific negotiator and the same guy who’d called a year earlier to tell me Martin Burnham had been killed. My stomach tied into a knot when I heard his voice.
“We just got a call from José,” Kevin said. “He's still in guerrilla territory but he escaped and he's on a bus and he's making his way back.” As Julie did, the first and most common "No" question you’ll use is some version of "How am I supposed to do that?" (for example, "How can we raise that much?"). Your tone of voice is critical as this phrase can be delivered as either an accusation or a request for assistance. So pay attention to your voice. This question tends to have the positive effect of making the other side take a good look at your situation. This positive dynamic is what I refer to as "forced empathy," and it's especially effective if leading up to it you’ve already been empathic with your counterpart. This engages the dynamic of reciprocity to lead them to do something for you. Starting with José's kidnapping, "How am I supposed to do that?" became our primary response to a kidnapper demanding a ransom. And we never had it backfire. Once I was working with an accounting consultant named Kelly who was owed a pile of money by a corporate client. She kept consulting because she believed she was developing a useful contact, and because the promise of a future payday seemed to justify continuing in good faith. But at a certain point, Kelly was so far behind on her own bills that she was in a bind. She couldn't continue to work with only a vague idea of when she'd get paid, but she worried that if she pushed too hard she wouldn't get paid at all. I told her to wait until the client asked for more work, because if she made a firm payment demand right away she would be vulnerable if they refused. Luckily for Kelly, the client soon called to ask her for more work. Once he finished his request, she calmly asked a "How" question:
"I'd love to help," she said, "but how am I supposed to do that?" By indicating her willingness to work but asking for help finding a way to do so, she left her deadbeat customer with no choice but to put her needs ahead of everything else. And she got paid. Besides saying "No," the other key benefit of asking "How" questions is, quite literally, that it forces your counterpart to consider and explain how a deal will be implemented. A deal is nothing without good implementation. Poor implementation is the cancer that eats your profits. By making your counterparts articulate implementation in their own words, your carefully calibrated "How" questions will convince them that the final solution is their idea. And that's crucial.