gree;CLUD
You are making me feel uncomfortable;
I do not understand;
I don’t think I can afford it;
I want something else;
I need more information; or
I want to talk it over with someone else.
Then, after pausing, ask solution-based questions or simply label their effect:
“What about this doesn’t work for you?”
“What would you need to make it work?”
“It seems like there's something here that bothers you.”
People have a need to say, “No.” So don’t just hope to hear it at some point; get them to say it early.
PERSUADE IN THEIR WORLD
I'd like to present you with a guy named Joe Businessman as he readies himself for a negotiation. You've met him before. He's the prepared type, with all his Getting to Yes strategies written out and memorized. And he's more than ready to unleash them on the guy across the table. Joe pauses to look at his expensive suit in the mirror, fantasizing about the impressive things he'll say and the fancy charts and graphs that'll back up those things and leave his counterpart - his opponent - vanquished and in defeat. He is Russell Crowe in Gladiator. He is The Man.
Now allow me to let you in on a secret: none of that preparation will mean a damn thing. His negotiation style is all me, me, me, ego, ego, ego. And when the people on the other side of the table pick up those signals, they're going to decide that it's best to politely, even furtively, ignore this Superman.
“Huh?” you say.
Sure, the word they'll say right off is “Yes,” but that word is only a tool to get this blowhard to go away. They'll weasel out later, claiming changing conditions, budget issues, the weather. For now, they just want to be released because Joe isn't convincing them of anything; he's only convincing himself.
I'll let you in on a secret. There are actually three kinds of “Yes”: Counterfeit, Confirmation, and Commitment.
A counterfeit "yes" is one in which your counterpart plans on saying “no” but either feels “yes” is an easier escape route or just wants to disingenuously keep the conversation going to obtain more information or some other kind of edge. A confirmation “yes” is generally innocent, a reflexive response to a black-or-white question; it's sometimes used to lay a trap but mostly it's just simple affirmation with no promise of action. And a commitment "yes" is the real deal; it's a true agreement that leads to action, a “yes” at the table that guarantees results.
For my review, Jim motioned me to the chair in front of him and gave me his biggest smile. I must have returned it with twice the wattage.
“Well, Chris,” he said, still smiling. “That was one of the worst calls I ever heard.”
I stared at him, gape-jawed.
“Jim, did you hear Daryl congratulate me?” I asked. “I talked him down, man. I killed it.”
As I listened to what Jim said, I felt that acid stomach rush you get when you are forced to accept that the guy dumping on you is completely right. Daryl's response had been a kind of "yes," but it had been anything but a true commitment "yes." He'd made no promise to action. His “yes” had been designed to make me feel good enough to leave him