closer to a win; it just angers the other side. So if "Yes" can be so damn uncomfortable, and "No" such a relief, why have we fetishized one and demonized the other? We have it backward. For good negotiators, "No" is pure gold. That negative provides a great opportunity for you and the other party to clarify what you really want by eliminating what you don't want. "No" is a safe choice that maintains the status quo; it provides a temporary oasis of control. At some point in their development, all negotiators have to come to grips with "No." When you come to realize the real psychological dynamic behind it, you'll love the word. It's not just that you lose your fear of it, but that you come to learn what it does for you and how you can build deals out of it. "Yes" and "Maybe" are often worthless. But "No" always alters the conversation. "NO" STARTS THE NEGOTIATION My fascination with "No" in all its beautiful nuance began with a conversation I had a few months before my negotiation career began. I started my career with the Bureau as a member of the FBI SWAT team in the Pittsburgh Division but after nearly two years I was transferred to New York, where the FBI attached me to the Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF). It was an amazing post: We spent our days and nights tracking suspected terrorists, investigating their cells, and assessing whether or how they might strike. We were untying knots of human anger in the midst of America's biggest city, making life-and-death decisions on who was dangerous and who was just blowing hot air. The work fascinated me. Ever since my first days with the Bureau, I had been obsessed with crisis response. The immediacy of the task entranced me. The stakes were high. Lives hung in the balance. The emotional terrain was complex, changing, and often conflicting. To successfully gain a hostage's safe release, a negotiator had to penetrate the hostage-taker's motives, state of mind, intelligence, and emotional strengths and weaknesses. The negotiator played the role of bully, conciliator, enforcer, savior, confessor, instigator, and peacemaker—and that's just a few of the parts. I thought I was cut out for every one of them. A few weeks after I got to Manhattan, I showed up at the desk of Amy Bonderow, who ran the FBI's Crisis Negotiation Team in New York. I didn't know beans about negotiating, so I went for the direct approach. "I want to be a hostage negotiator," I said. "Everyone does—got any training?" she asked. "No," I said. "Any credentials?" "Nope." I answered. "Any experience?" she asked. "No," I answered. "Do you have a degree in psychology, sociology, anything at all related to negotiation?" "No." My conversation with Amy kicked off my awareness of the complex and hidden subtleties of conversation, the power of certain words, the seemingly unintelligible emotional truths that so often underlie intelligible exchanges. A trap into which many fall is to take what other people say literally. I started to see that while having protected myself, I could relax and more easily consider the possibilities. "No" is the start of the negotiation, not the end of it. We've been conditioned to fear the word "No." But it is a statement of perception far more often than of fact. It seldom means, "I have considered all the facts and made a rational choice." Instead, "No" is often a decision, frequently temporary, to maintain the status quo. Change is scary, and "No" provides a little protection from that scariness. Jim Camp, in his excellent book, Start with NO, counsels the reader to give their adversary (his word for counterpart) permission to say "No" from the outset of a negotiation. He calls it "the right to veto." He observes that people will fight to the death to preserve their right to say "No," so give them that right and the negotiating environment becomes more constructive and collaborative almost immediately. When I read Camp's book, I realized this was something we'd known as hostage negotiators for years. We'd learned that the quickest way to get a hostage-taker out was to take the time to talk them out, as opposed to "demanding" their surrender. Demanding their surrender, "telling" them to come out, always ended up creating a much longer standoff—and occasionally actually contributed to death. It comes down to the deep and universal human need for autonomy. People need to feel in control. When you preserve a person's autonomy by clearly giving them permission to say "No" to your ideas, the emotions calm, the effectiveness of the decisions goes up, and the other party can really look at your proposal. They're allowed to hold it in their hands, to turn it around. And it gives you time to elaborate or pivot in order to convince your counterpart that the change you're proposing is more advantageous than the status quo. Great negotiators seek "No" because they know that's often when the real negotiation begins. Pol