People always make more effort to implement a solution when they think it's theirs. That is simply human nature. That's why negotiation is often called "the art of letting someone else have your way."

There are two key questions you can ask to push your counterparts to think they are defining success their own way: "How will we know if we're on track?" and "How will we address things if we find out we're off track?" When they answer, you summarize their answers until you get a "That's right." Then you'll know they've bought in.

On the flip side, be wary of two telling signs that your counterpart doesn't believe the idea is theirs. As I've noted, when they say, "You're right," it's often a good indicator they are not vested in what is being discussed. And when you push for implementation and they say, "I'll try," you should get a sinking feeling in your stomach. Because this really means, "I plan to fail."

When you hear either of these, dive back in with calibrated "How" questions until they define the terms of successful implementation in their own voice. Follow up by summarizing what they have said to get a "That's right." Let the other side feel victory. Let them think it was their idea. Subsume your ego. Remember: "Yes" is nothing without "How." So keep asking "How?" And succeed.

Influencing Those Behind the Table

A few weeks after José got back to the United States, I drove to his family's place in upstate New York. I was thrilled when José escaped, but the case left me with one nagging worry: Had my new strategy failed? You see, José had gotten home safely, but not because we'd negotiated his release. I worried that our winning had less to do with our brilliant strategy than with dumb luck.

After being greeted warmly by Julie and her parents, José and I grabbed some coffee and sat down. I'd gone there to do what CNU referred to as a hostage survival debriefing. I was after insights into how to better advise people facing potential kidnappings, not just physically, but psychologically. I was also burning to find out what had occurred behind the scenes because it seemed as if my new strategy hadn't worked.

Finally, the conversation came around to our use of calibrated questions. "You know what?" he said. "The craziest thing was that their negotiator was supposed to stay in town and negotiate the deal, but because Julie kept asking him questions he didn't really know for sure how to answer, he kept coming out to the jungle. They all would get together and have a huge discussion about how to respond. They even thought about taking me into town and putting me on the phone because Julie was so persistent with asking if I was okay."

Right then I knew we had the right tool. It was exactly the opposite of the Burnham case, where our negotiator cut the deal with one of the guys and then the rest of them took the $300,000 and said, "No, we're not doing that." Causing the other side to work that hard and forcing that much internal coordination in service of our own goals was unprecedented.

Our negotiating strategy in Ecuador worked not just because the questions contributed to the environment that let José escape, but because they made sure the kidnappers—our counterparts—were all on the same page. Yes, few hostage-takers—and few business deal makers—fly solo. But for the most part, there are almost always other players, people who can act as deal makers or deal killers. If you truly want to get to "Yes" and get your deal implemented, you have to discover how to affect these individuals.

When implementation happens by committee, the support of that committee is key. You always have to identify and unearth their motivations, even if you haven't yet identified each individual on that committee. That can be easy as asking a few calibrated questions, like: How does this affect everybody else? How on board is the rest of your team? How do we make sure that we deliver the right material to the right people? How do we ensure the managers of those we're training are fully on board? If we had asked questions like that, the CEO and HR head would have checked with this guy, maybe even brought him into the conversation. And saved us all a lot of pain.

Spotting Liars, Dealing With Jerks, and Charming Everyone Else

As a negotiator, you're going to run into guys who lie to your face and try to scare you into agreement. Aggressive jerks and serial fabricators come with the territory, and dealing with them is something you have to do. But learning how to handle aggression and identify falsehood is just part of a larger issue: learning how to spot and interpret the subtleties of communication—both verbal and nonverbal—that reveal the mental states of your counterparts.

Truly effective negotiators are conscious of the verbal, paraverbal (how it's said), and nonverbal aspects of communication. They pay attention to tone, body language, facial expressions, and other subtle cues that can give away a person's true intentions or feelings about a particular topic. By being attuned to these subtleties, effective negotiators can better understand their counterparts' motivations and needs, which can help them craft more compelling arguments and offers.

In addition to observing verbal and nonverbal cues, effective negotiators also actively listen to what their counterparts are saying. They ask open-ended questions that encourage their counterparts to share more information about their goals, concerns, and priorities. By truly listening and understanding the other person's perspective, effective negotiators can build trust, rapport, and mutual respect—all of which are crucial components of successful negotiation.

Ultimately, being a great negotiator requires a combination of skills: the ability to ask the right questions, actively listen to the answers, observe and interpret communication subtleties, and adapt your approach based on what you learn about the other person's needs and priorities. By honing these skills, you can become a more effective negotiator who can navigate even the most challenging situations with confidence and success.