The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts.
Repair it into clean, readable English.
Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
e	a	cup	of	coffee.	You’re	going	to	think	to
yourself	that	$20	for	three	minutes	is	$400	an	hour.	You’re
going	to	be	thrilled.
What	if	then	you	find	out	that	by	getting	you	to	run	that
errand	 I	 made	 a	 million	 dollars.	 You’d	 go	 from	 being
ecstatic	 for	 making	 $400	 an	 hour	 to	 being	 angry	 because
you	got	ripped	off.
The	value	 of	the	$20,	just	like	the	value	of	the	coffee
mug,	 didn’t	 change.	 But	 your	 perspective	 of	 it	did.	 Just	 by
how	I	position	the	$20,	I	can	make	you	happy	or	disgusted
by	it.
I	 tell	 you	 that	 not	 to	 expose	 our	 decision	 making	 as
emotional	 and	 irrational.	 We’ve	 already	 seen	 that.	 What	 I
am	 saying	 is	 that	 while	 our	 decisions	 may	 be	 largely
irrational,	that	doesn’t	mean	there	aren’t	consistent	patterns,
principles,	 and	 rules	 behind	 how	 we	 act.	 And	 once	 you
know	 those	 mental	 patterns,	 you	 start	 to	 see	 ways	 to
influence	them.
By	far	the	best	theory	for	describing	the	principles	of	our
irrational	 decisions	 is	 something	 called	
Prospect	 Theory
.
Created	in	1979	by	the	psychologists	Daniel	Kahneman	andAmos	 Tversky,	 prospect	 theory	 describes	 how	 people
choose	 between	 options	 that	 involve	 risk,	 like	 in	 a
negotiation.	The	theory	argues	that	people	are	drawn	to	sure
things	 over	 probabilities,	 even	 when	 the	 probability	 is	 a
better	choice.	That’s	called	the	
Certainty	Effect
.	And	people
will	take	greater	risks	to	avoid	losses	than	to	achieve	gains.
That’s	why	 people	 who	 statistically	 have	 no	 need	 for
insurance	buy	it.	 Or	 consider	 this:	 a	 person	 who’s	 told	 he
has	a	 95	 percent	 chance	 of	 receiving	 $10,000	 or	 a	 100
percent	chance	of	getting	$9,499	will	usually	
avoid	risk	and
take	the	100	percent	chance.
2.	 LET	 THE	 OTHER	 GUY	 GO	 FIRST	 .	 .	 .	 MOST	 OF
the	TIME.
Now,	 it’s	 clear	 that	 the	 benefits	 of	 anchoring	 emotions	 are
great	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 bending	 your	 counterpart’s	 reality.
But	going	first	is	 not	 necessarily	the	 best	 thing	 when	 it
comes	to	negotiating	price.
When	the	famous	film	director	Billy	Wilder	went	to	hire
the	 famous	 detective	 novelist	 Raymond	 Chandler	 to	 write
the	 1944	 classic	
Double	 Indemnity
,	 Chandler	 was	 new	 to
Hollywood.	 But	 he	 came	 ready	 to	 negotiate,	 and	 in	 his
meeting	with	Wilder	and	the	movie’s	producer,	 Chandler
made	 the	 first	 salary	 offer:	 he	 bluffly	 demanded	 $150	 per
week	and	warned	Wilder	that	it	might	take	him	three	weeks
to	finish	the	project.
Wilder	 and	 the	 producer	 could	 barely	 stop	 from
laughing,	 because	 they	 had	 been	 planning	 to	 pay	 Chandler
$750	 per	 week	 and	 they	 knew	 that	 movie	 scripts	 took
months	 to	 write.	 Lucky	 for	 Chandler,	 Wilder	 and	 the