If you already have another dealer who’s given you a written offer for $10,000, that's your BATNA (Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement). The problem is that BATNA tricks negotiators into aiming low. Researchers have found that humans have a limited capacity for keeping focus in complex, stressful situations like negotiations. And so, once a negotiation is underway, we tend to gravitate toward the focus point that has the most psychological significance for us. In that context, obsessing over a BATNA turns it into your target, and thereby sets the upper limit of what you will ask for. After you've spent hours on a BATNA, you mentally concede everything beyond it.
God knows aiming low is seductive. Self-esteem is a huge factor in negotiation, and many people set modest goals to protect it. It's easier to claim victory when you aim low. That's why some negotiation experts say that many people who think they have "win-win" goals really have a "wimp-win" mentality. The "wimp-win" negotiator focuses on their bottom line, and that's where they end up.
So if BATNA isn't your centerpiece, what should be? I tell my clients as part of their preparation they should think about the outcome extremes: best and worst. If you've got both ends covered, you'll be ready for anything. So know what you cannot accept and have an idea about the best-case outcome, but keep in mind that since there's information yet to be acquired from the other side, it's quite possible that best case might be even better than you know.
Remember, never be so sure of what you want that you wouldn't take something better. Once you've got flexibility in the forefront of your mind, you come into a negotiation with a winning mindset. Let's say you're selling old speakers because you need $100 to put toward a new set. If you concentrate on the $100 minimum, you'll relax when you hear that number and that's what you'll get. But if you know they are for sale in used audio stores for $140, you could set a high-end goal of $150, while remaining open to better things.
Now, while I counsel thinking about a best/worst range to give my clients the security of some structure, when it comes to what actually goes on your one sheet, my advice is to just stick with the high-end goal, as it will motivate and focus your psychological powers, priming you to think you are facing a "loss" for any term that falls short. Decades of goal-setting research is clear that people who set specific, challenging, but realistic goals end up getting better deals than those who don't set goals or simply strive to do their best.
Bottom line: People who expect more (and articulate it) get more. Here are the four steps for setting your goal:
■ Set an optimistic but reasonable goal and define it clearly.
■ Write it down.
■ Discuss your goal with a colleague (this makes it harder to wimp out).
■ Carry the written goal into the negotiation.
SECTION II: SUMMARY
Summarize and write out in just a couple of sentences the known facts that have led up to the negotiation. You're going to have to have something to talk about beyond a self-serving assessment of what you want. And you better be ready to respond with tactical empathy to your counterpart's arguments; unless they're incompetent, their position is likely well thought out and based on valid concerns.
SECTION III: CALIBRATED QUESTIONS
Prepare three to five calibrated questions to reveal value to you and your counterpart and identify and overcome potential deal killers. Effective negotiators look past their counterparts' stated demands (what the party demands) and delve into their underlying motivations (what is making them want what they want). Motivations are what they are worried about and what they hope for, even lust for.
There will be a small group of "What" and "How" questions that you will find yourself using in nearly every situation. Here are a few of them: What are we trying to accomplish? How is that worthwhile? What's the core issue here? How does that affect things? What's the biggest challenge you face? How does this fit into what the objective is?
QUESTIONS TO IDENTIFY BEHIND-THE-TABLE DEAL KILLERS When implementation happens by committee, the support of that committee is key. You'll want to tailor your calibrated questions to identify and unearth the motivations of those behind the table, including: How does this affect the rest of your team? How on board are the people not on this call? What do your colleagues see as their main challenges in this area?
QUESTIONS TO IDENTIFY AND DIFFUSE DEAL-KILLING ISSUES Internal negotiating influence often sits with the people who are most comfortable with things as they are. Change may make them look as if they haven't been doing their job. Your dilemma in such a negotiation is how to make them look good in the face of that change.
You'll be tempted to concentrate on money, but put that aside for now. A surprisingly high percentage of negotiations hinge on something outside dollars and cents. Often they have more to do with self-esteem, status, autonomy, and other nonfinancial needs. Think about their perceived losses. Never forget that a loss stings at least twice as much as an equivalent gain. For example, the guy across the table may be more concerned about his job security than the financial implications of the deal.