The text contains a mix of different font encodings and glyph artifacts. Below is the corrected and cleaned English version:

"Just yet. All we knew was that we'd just gotten all this new intel, which told us we were closer to achieving our desired outcome than we had just thought. This was a positive development, something to celebrate. With what we now knew, it was going to be a whole lot easier to negotiate our way through the rest of it, and yet this commander was angry. He didn't like that he'd been played, so he turned to one of the guys from NYPD's Technical Assistance Response Unit (TARU) and commanded them to get a camera inside the bank, a mic...

Now that I was huddled with Bobby, the commander swapped me out in favor of another primary negotiator on the phone. The new negotiator played it the same way I had, a couple of hours earlier- said, "This is Dominick. You're talking to me now."

Dominick Misino was a great hostage negotiator- in my view, one of the world's great closers, which was the term often used for the guy brought in to bang out the last details and secure the deal. He didn't get rattled and he was good at what he did. Matter-of-fact. Street smart.

Dominick plowed ahead. And then, an amazing thing happened- a nearly disastrous amazing thing. As Chris Watts was talking to Dominick, he heard an electric tool of some kind burrowing its way through the wall behind him. It was one of our TARU guys, trying to get a bug planted inside- in precisely the wrong spot, at precisely the wrong time. Chris Watts was already rattled enough as it was, his partner giving himself up like that and leaving him to play out the siege on his own. And now, to hear our guys drilling through the wall, it just about set him off.

He responded like a pit bull backed into a corner. He called Dominick a liar. Dominick was unflappable. He kept his cool as Chris Watts raged on the other end of the phone, and eventually Dominick's cool, calm demeanor brought the guy from a boil to a simmer.

In retrospect, it was a fool move to try to get a bug inside the bank at this late stage- born out of frustration and panic. We'd gotten one of the hostage-takers out of the bank, but now we'd given back a measure of control. Startling the one remaining hostage-taker, who may or may not have been a loose cannon, was absolutely not a good idea. As Dominick went to work smoothing over the situation, Chris Watts switched things up on us. He said, "What if I let a hostage go?"

This came as if from nowhere. Dominick hadn't even thought to ask, but Chris Watts just offered up one of the tellers like it was no big deal- and to him, at this late stage in the standoff, I guess it wasn't. From his view, such a conciliatory move might buy him enough time to figure out a way to escape. Dominick remained calm, but seized on the opportunity. He said he wanted to talk to the hostage first, to make sure everything went okay.

It was a long, long day, but it went down in the books as a success. Nobody was hurt. The bad guys were in custody. And I emerged from the experience humbled by how much more there was to learn, but at the same time, awakened to and inspired by the elemental power of emotion, dialogue, and the FBI's evolving toolbox of applied psychological tactics to influence and persuade just about anyone in any situation.

In the decades since my initiation into the world of high-stakes negotiations, I've been struck again and again by how valuable these seemingly simple approaches can be. The ability to get inside the head- and eventually under the skin- of your counterpart depends on these techniques and a willingness to change your approach, based on new evidence, along the way. As I've worked with executives and students to develop these skills, I always try to reinforce the message that being right isn't the key to a successful negotiation- having the right mindset is."