The text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts. Repair it into clean, readable English. Do not summarize or omit content.
TEXT:
at	doesn’t
make	 sense—something	 “crazy”—that	 a	 crucial	 fork	 in	 the
road	 is	 presented:	 push	 forward,	 even	 more	 forcefully,	
into
that	which	we	initially	can’t	process;	or	take	the	other	path,
the	one	to	guaranteed	failure,	in	which	we	tell	ourselves	that
negotiating	was	useless	anyway.
In	 their	 great	 book	
Negotiation	 Genius
,
4
	 Harvard
Business	 School	 professors	 Deepak	 Malhotra	 and	 Max	 H.
Bazerman	provide	a	look	at	the	common	reasons	negotiators
mistakenly	 call	 their	 counterparts	 crazy.	 I’d	 like	 to	 talk
through	them	here.
MISTAKE	#1:	THEY	ARE	ILL-INFORMED
Often	the	other	side	is	acting	on	bad	information,	and	when
people	 have	 bad	 information	 they	 make	 bad	 choices.
There’s	 a	 great	 computer	 industry	 term	 for	 this:	 GIGO—
Garbage	In,	Garbage	Out.
As	 an	 example,	 Malhotra	 talks	 about	 a	 student	 of	 his
who	was	in	a	dispute	with	an	ex-employee	who	claimed	he
was	 owed	 $130,000	 in	 commissions	 for	 work	 he	 had	 done
before	being	fired;	he	was	threatening	a	lawsuit.
Confused,	 the	 executive	 turned	 to	 the	 company’s
accountants.	There	he	discovered	the	problem:	the	accounts
had	been	a	mess	when	the	employee	was	fired	but	had	since
been	 put	 into	 order.	 With	 the	 clean	 information,	 the
accountants	assured	the	executive	that	in	fact	the	employee
owed	the	company	$25,000.
Eager	 to	 avoid	 a	 lawsuit,	 the	 executive	 called	 the
employee,	explained	the	situation,	and	made	an	offer:	if	the
employee	 dropped	 the	lawsuit	 he	 could	 keep	 the	 $25,000.
To	 his	 surprise,	 the	 employee	 said	 that	 he	 was	 going
forward	with	the	suit	anyway;	he	acted	irrational,	crazy.
Malhotra	 told	 his	 student	 that	 the	 problem	 was	 not
craziness,	 but	 a	 lack	 of	 information	 and	 trust.	 So	 the
executive	had	an	outside	accounting	firm	audit	the	numbers
and	send	the	results	to	the	employee.
The	result?	The	employee	dropped	the	suit.
The	 clear	 point	 here	 is	 that	 people	 operating	 with
incomplete	 information	 appear	 irrational,	 but	 they	 are	 simply	 trying
to	 make	 the	 best	 decision	 possible	 based	 on	 the	 facts
that	 they	 have.	 Understanding	 this	 can	 help	 you	 to	 better
negotiate	and	resolve	disputes.
MISTAKE	#2:	THEY	ARE	CONSTRAINED
Sometimes,	people	may	seem	irrational	because	they	are	being	forced
to	make	decisions	based	on	external	factors	that	you	don’t	know
about.	 For	 example,	 an	 employee	might	decide	to	quit	in	the
middle	of	a	career-making	project,	just	before	bonus	season,
because	 he	 or	 she	 has	 learned	 that	 colleagues	 are	 making
more	 money.	 For	 that	 employee,	 fairness	is	as	much	an
interest	as	money.
Whatever	the	specifics	of	the	situation,	these	people	are
not	 acting	 irrationally.	 They	 are	 simply	 complying	with
needs	 and	 desires	 that	 you	don’t	 yet	 understand,	 what	 the
world	 looks	 like	 to	 them	 based	 on	 their	 own	 set	 of	 rules.
Your	job	is	to	bring	these	Black	Swans	to	light.
To	uncover	these	hidden	factors,	you	need	to	establish	personal,
face-to-face	relationships	with	your	counterparts.	 Today,	 a	 lot	 of	 younger	 people	 do	 almost	 everything
over	 email.	 But	 it’s	 very	 difficult	 to	 find	 Black	 Swans	with	 email	for	 the	simple
reason	 that,	 even	 if	 you	 knock	 your	 counterpart	 off	 their
moorings	with	great	labels	and	calibrated	questions,	email	doesn’t	allow
for	tone-of-voice	effects,	and	 it	 doesn’t	 let	 you	 read	 the
nonverbal	parts	of	your	counterpart’s	response	(remember	7-38-55).
By	getting	out	there	and	establishing	personal	relationships,	you	can
begin	to	uncover	these	hidden	factors	that	are	influencing	your
counterpart’s	decisions.	 In	turn,	this	will	allow	you	to	negotiate
more	effectively.