Before, the secret to gaining the upper hand in a negotiation is giving the other side the illusion of control. That's why calibrated questions are ingenious: Calibrated questions make your counterpart feel like they're in charge, but it's really you who is framing the conversation. Your counterpart will have no idea how constrained they are by your questions.

Once I was negotiating with one of my FBI bosses about attending a Harvard executive program. He had already approved the expenditure for the travel, but on the day before I was supposed to leave, he called me into his office and began to question the validity of the trip. I knew him well enough to know that he was trying to show me that he was in charge. So after we talked for a while, I looked at him and asked, "When you originally approved this trip, what did you have in mind?"
He visibly relaxed as he sat back in his chair and brought the top of his fingers and thumbs together in the shape of a steeple. Generally, this is a body language that means the person feels superior and in charge. "Listen," he said, "just make sure you brief everyone when you get back."
That question, calibrated to acknowledge his power and nudge him toward explaining himself, gave him the illusion of control. And it got me just what I wanted.

Let's pause for a minute here, because there's one vitally important thing you have to remember when you enter a negotiation armed with your list of calibrated questions: Without self-control and emotional regulation, it doesn't work. The very first thing I talk about when I'm training new negotiators is the critical importance of self-control. If you can't control your own emotions, how can you expect to influence the emotions of another party?

To show you what I mean, let me tell you a story. Not long ago, a freelance marketing strategist came to me with a problem. One of her clients had hired a new CEO, a penny pincher whose strategy was to cut costs by offshoring everything he could. He was also a male chauvinist who didn't like the assertive style in which the strategist, a woman, conducted herself.
Immediately my client and the CEO started to go at each other on conference calls in that passive-aggressive way that is ever present in corporate America. After a few weeks of this, my client decided she had had enough and invoiced the CEO for the last bit of work she had done (about $7,000) and politely said that the arrangement wasn't working out. The CEO answered by saying the bill was too high, that he would pay half of it and that they would talk about the rest.
After that, he stopped answering her calls.
The underlying dynamic was that this guy didn't like being questioned by anyone, especially a woman. So she and I developed a strategy that showed him she understood where she went wrong and acknowledged his power, while at the same time directing his energy toward solving her problem.

The script we came up with hit all the best practices of negotiation we've talked about so far. Here it is by steps:
1. A "No"-oriented email question to reinitiate contact: "Have you given up on settling this amicably?"
2. A statement that leaves only the answer of "That's right" to form a dynamic of agreement: "It seems that you feel my bill is not justified."
3. Calibrated questions about the problem to get him to reveal his thinking: "How does this bill violate our agreement?"
4. More "No"-oriented questions to remove unspoken barriers: "Are you saying I misled you?" "Are you saying I didn't do as you asked?" "Are you saying I reneged on our agreement?" Or "Are you saying I failed you?"
5. Labeling and mirroring the essence of his answers if they are not acceptable so he has to consider them again: (No response needed)
6. The basic issue here is that when people feel that they are not in control, they adopt what psychologists call a hostage mentality. That is, in moments of conflict they react to their lack of power by either becoming extremely defensive or lashing out. Neurologically, in situations like this the fight-or-flight mechanism in the reptilian brain or the emotions in the limbic system overwhelm the rational part of our mind, the neocortex, leading us to overreact in an impulsive, instinctive way. In a negotiation, like the one between my client and the CEO, this always produces a negative outcome. So we have to train our neocortex to override the emotions from the other two brains. That means biting your tongue and learning how to mindfully change your state to something more positive. And it means lowering the hostage mentality in your counterpart by asking a question or even offering an apology. (No response needed)