I suggest that it's best to keep your own deadlines secret. And that's the advice you'll get from most old-school negotiation experts. In his bestselling 1980 book, You Can Negotiate Anything, negotiation expert Herb Cohen tells the story of his first big business deal, when his company sent him to Japan to negotiate with a supplier. When he arrived, his counterparts asked him how long he was staying, and Cohen said a week. For the next seven days, his hosts proceeded to entertain him with parties, tours, and outings—everything but negotiation. In fact, Cohen's counterparts didn't start serious talks until he was about to leave, and the two sides hammered out the deal's final details in the car to the airport. Cohen landed in the United States with the sinking feeling that he'd been played, and that he had conceded too much under deadline pressure. Would he have told them his deadline in retrospect? No, Cohen says, because it gave them a tool he didn't have: "They knew my deadline, but I didn't know theirs." That mentality is everywhere these days. Seeing a simple rule to follow and assuming that a deadline is a strategic weakness, most negotiators follow Cohen's advice and hide their drop-dead date. Allow me to let you in on a little secret: Cohen, and the herd of negotiation "experts" who follow his lead, are wrong. Deadlines cut both ways. Cohen may well have been nervous about what his boss would say if he left Japan without an agreement. But it's also true that Cohen's counterparts wouldn't have won if he'd left without a deal. That's the key: When the negotiation is over for one side, it's over for the other too. In fact, Don A. Moore, a professor at the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley, says that hiding a deadline actually puts the negotiator in the worst possible position. In his research, he's found that hiding your deadlines dramatically increases the risk of an impasse. That's because having a deadline pushes you to speed up your concessions, but the other side, thinking that it has time, will just hold out for more. Imagine if when NBA owners set a lockout deadline during contract negotiations they didn't tell the players' union. They would concede and concede as the deadline approached, inciting the union to keep negotiating past the secret deadline. In that sense, hiding a deadline means you're negotiating with yourself, and you always lose when you do so. Moore discovered that when negotiators tell their counterparts about their deadline, they get better deals. It's true. First, by revealing your cutoff you reduce the risk of impasse. And second, when an opponent knows your deadline, he'll get to the real deal- and concession-making more quickly. I've got one final point to make before we move on: Deadlines are almost never ironclad. What's more important is engaging in the process and having a feel for how long that will take. You may see that you have more to accomplish than time will actually allow before the clock runs out. NO SUCH THING AS FAIR In the third week of my negotiations class, we play my favorite type of game, that is, the kind that shows my students how much they don't understand themselves (I know—I'm cruel). It's called the Ultimatum Game, and it goes like this: After the students split into pairs of a "proposer" and an "accepter," I give each proposer $10. The proposer then has to offer the accepter a round number of dollars. If the accepter agrees he or she receives what's been offered and the proposer gets the rest. If the accepter refuses the offer, neither of them get anything. In most versions of the game, the optimal offer is $1, since that maximizes the amount each player can potentially receive without guaranteeing a rejection. Yet in reality, proposers almost never make this logical offer. Why, I ask, did none of the proposers offer $1, which is the best rational offer for them and logically unrejectable for the accepter? And if they did and they got rejected—which happens—why did the accepter turn them down? "Anyone who made any offer other than $1 made an emotional choice," I say. "And for you accepters who turned down $1, since when is getting $0 better than getting $1? Did the rules of finance suddenly change?" This rocks my students' view of themselves as rational actors. But they're not. None of us are. We're all irrational, emotional. Emotion is a necessary element to decision making that we ignore at our own peril.