The important thing here is that Marti not only accepted the “No”; she searched it out and embraced it. At a recent sales conference, I asked the participants for the one word they all dread. The entire group yelled, "No!" To them—and to almost everyone—"No" means one thing: end of discussion. But that's not what it means.
"No" is not failure. Used strategically, it's an answer that opens the path forward. Getting to the point where you're no longer horrified by the word "No" is a liberating moment that every negotiator needs to reach. Because if your biggest fear is "No," you can't negotiate. You're the hostage of "Yes." You're handcuffed. You're done.
So let's undress "No." It's a reaffirmation of autonomy. It is not a use or abuse of power; it is not an act of rejection; it is not a manifestation of stubbornness; it is not the end of the negotiation.
In fact, "No" often opens the discussion up. The sooner you say "No," the sooner you're willing to see options and opportunities that you were blind to previously. Saying "No" often spurs people to action because they feel they've protected themselves and now see an opportunity slipping away.
Since I've demystified "No" for myself, I've found the ideas, perceptions, and baggage that people have with that two-letter word to be fascinating. To me, it's like watching a movie or a music video from the 1980s for the umpteenth time. You can identify with the experience—while simultaneously being conscious of the fact that the world, and you, have moved on.
Today, I coach my students to learn to see "No" for what it is. Rather than harming them or those they negotiate with, "No" protects and benefits all parties in an exchange. "No" creates safety, security, and the feeling of control. It's a requirement to implementable success. It's a pause, a nudge, and a chance for the speaker to articulate what they do want.
As you can see, "No" has a lot of skills.
- "No" allows the real issues to be brought forth;
- "No" protects people from making—and lets them correct—ineffective decisions;
- "No" slows things down so that people can freely embrace their decisions and the agreements they enter into;
- "No" helps people feel safe, secure, emotionally comfortable, and in control of their decisions;
- "No" moves you closer to a "Yes."
One negotiating genius who's impossible to miss is Mark Cuban, the billionaire owner of the Dallas Mavericks. I always quote to my students one of his best lines on negotiation: "Every 'No' gets me closer to a 'Yes.'" But then I remind them that extracting those "No's" on the road to "Yes" isn't always easy.
There is a big difference between making your counterpart feel that they can say "No" and actually getting them to say it. Sometimes, if you're talking to somebody who is just not listening, the only way you can crack their cranium is to antagonize them into "No."
One great way to do this is to mislabel one of the other party's emotions or desires. You say something that you know is totally wrong, like "So it seems that you really are eager to leave your job" when they clearly want to stay. That forces them to listen and makes them comfortable correcting you by saying, "No, that's not it. This is it."
Another way to force "No" in a negotiation is to ask the other party what they don't want. "Let's talk about what you would say 'No' to," you'd say. And people are comfortable saying "No" here because it feels like self-protection. And once you've gotten them to say "No," people are much more open to moving forward toward new options and ideas.
"No"—or the lack thereof—also serves as a warning, the canary in the coal mine. If despite all your efforts, the other party won't say "No," you're dealing with people who are indecisive or confused or who have a hidden agenda. In cases like that, you have to end the negotiation and walk away.
Think of it like this: No "No" means no go.
EMAIL MAGIC: HOW NEVER TO BE IGNORED AGAIN
There's nothing more irritating than being ignored. Being turned down is bad, but getting no response at all is the pits. It makes you feel invisible, as if you don't exist. And it's a waste of your time. We've all been through it: You send an email to someone you're trying to do business with and they ignore you. Then you send a polite follow-up and they stonewall you.