Quarters to lobby the company CEO. "I would help you in any way," my student said. "But I could help with the networking and also talk you up to the CEO even if I were at headquarters with the consumer products division, right?" "That's right," he said. "If you get an offer from the consumer products unit, I will approve it." Bingo! By asking questions that got him to "that's right," my student had achieved his goal. He also got his boss to reveal two "Black Swans," the unspoken, underlying breakthrough dynamics of a negotiation (explored in more detail in Chapter 10):

■ His boss needed someone to help him network and communicate in headquarters.
■ His boss would be up for a promotion and needed someone to talk him up to the CEO.

My student was able to win the job he desired on the consumer electronics division. And he's been talking up his former boss. "I was stunned," he wrote me in an email. "In this culture it is not really possible to know what a superior is thinking." I have many opportunities to travel the country and speak to business leaders, either in formal speaking engagements or private counseling sessions. I entertain them with war stories, then describe some basic negotiating skills. I always impart a few techniques. Getting to "that's right" is a staple.

After a speech in Los Angeles, one of the attendees, Emily, sent me an email: Hi Chris, I feel compelled to tell you that I just tried the "That's right" technique in a price negotiation with a potential new client. And, I got what I wanted. I'm so excited!

Before I probably would have just gone with the "in-the-middle" suggested price (halfway between my initial offer and her initial counter). Instead, I believe I correctly assessed her motivations, presented her with the right statement to get to a "that's right" (in her mind) . . . and then she proposed the solution I wanted and asked if I would agree to it! So, of course. Thank you!

Emily
And I thought to myself: That's right.

KEY LESSONS "Sleeping in the same bed and dreaming different dreams" is an old Chinese expression that describes the intimacy of partnership (whether in marriage or in business) without the communication necessary to sustain it. Such is the recipe for bad marriages and bad negotiations. With each party having its own set of objectives, its own goals and motivations, the truth is that the conversational niceties—the socially lubricating "yeses" and "you're rights" that get thrown out fast and furious early in any interaction—are not in any way a substitute for real understanding between you and your partner.

The power of getting to that understanding, and not to some simple "yes," is revelatory in the art of negotiation. The moment you've convinced someone that you truly understand her dreams and feelings (the whole world she inhabits), mental and behavioral change becomes possible, and the foundation for a breakthrough has been laid.

Use these lessons to lay that foundation:
■ Creating unconditional positive regard opens the door to changing thoughts and behaviors. Humans have an innate urge toward socially constructive behavior. The more a person feels understood, and positively affirmed in that understanding, the more likely that urge for constructive behavior will take hold.
■ "That's right" is better than "yes." Strive for it. Reaching "that's right" in a negotiation creates breakthroughs.
■ Use a summary to trigger a "that's right." The building blocks of a good summary are a label combined with paraphrasing. Identify, rearticulate, and emotionally affirm "the world according to . . ." And CHAPTER 6 BEND THEIR REALITY One Monday morning in Haiti's capital, the politician's nephew received a ransom call from the kidnappers of his aunt. The guy was so petrified he could only think of doing one thing: paying the thugs. His reaction makes sense: when you get a call from brutal criminals who say they'll kill your aunt unless you pay them immediately, it seems impossible to find leverage in the situation. So you pay the ransom and they release your relative, right? Wrong. There's always leverage. Negotiation is never a linear formula: add X to Y to get Z. We all have irrational and blind spots, hidden needs, and undeveloped notions. Once you understand that subterranean world of unspoken needs and thoughts, you'll discover a universe of variables that can be leveraged to change your counterpart's needs and expectations. Don't compromise. Let's go back to the $150,000 ransom demand. We're always taught to look for the win-win solution, to accommodate, to be reasonable. So what's the win-win here? What's the compromise? The traditional negotiating logic that's drilled into us from an early age, the kind of that exalts compromises, says, "Let's just split the difference and offer them $75,000. Then everyone's happy." No. Just, simply, no. The win-win mindset pushed by so many negotiation books and courses says, "I want a win-win solution," but it doesn't give any clear guidance on how to achieve that. It's an attractive concept, but it's not always the most effective strategy in a high-stakes negotiation.