"There's always a team on the other side. If you are not influencing those behind the table, you are vulnerable." A few years ago in St. Martin Parish, Louisiana, a group of inmates armed with makeshift knives took the warden and some of his staff hostage. The situation was especially nerve-wracking because the prisoners were both tense and disorganized, which meant anything could happen.
The negotiators sensed that, beneath the bluster, the prisoners didn't really want to hurt the staff. They knew that they felt backed into a corner and, more than anything, they wanted the situation to end.
But there was a stumbling block: the inmates were afraid that the prisoners who gave up after taking correctional officers hostage, not to mention the warden, would end up beaten and badly.
So the negotiators delivered a pair of walkie-talkies to the inmates and designed this elaborate surrender ritual to get the hostage-takers to end the siege. The idea was elegantly simple:
The inmates would send out one of their guys with a walkie-talkie, and he'd walk past the three perimeters of combined multiagency law enforcement that were stationed outside the prison. Once he'd walked past the final perimeter, he'd get into the paddy wagon and be transferred to jail. There, he'd use the walkie-talkie to call the guys back in the prison and say, essentially, "They didn't kick my ass." And they'd know it was okay to come out just like he did, one at a time.
After some haggling, the inmates agreed with the plan and the first inmate comes out. It starts off great. He walks past the federal zone, then the SWAT zone, and then he makes it to the outer perimeter. But just as he's about to climb into the paddy wagon, some guy sees the walkie-talkie and says, "What the hell are you doing with that?" and confiscates it before sending the guy off to jail.
The inmates back in the prison start to freak out because their buddy hasn't called. The one with the other walkie-talkie calls the negotiators and starts yelling, "Why didn't he call? They're kicking his ass. We told you!" He starts talking about cutting off a hostage's finger, just to make sure the negotiators know the inmates are for real.
Now it's the negotiators who are freaking out. They sprint to the perimeter and start screaming at everyone. It's life and death at stake. Or at least an amputated finger. Finally, fifteen nail-biting minutes later, this SWAT guy comes striding up, all proud of himself. "Some idiot gave this dude a radio," he says, and sort of smiles as he hands the negotiators the walkie-talkie. The negotiators barely stop themselves from slugging the guy before they tear off to the jail to have the first inmate call in.
The point here is that your job as a negotiator isn't just to get to an agreement. It's getting to one that can be implemented and making sure that happens. Negotiators have to be decision architects: they have to dynamically and adaptively design the verbal and nonverbal elements of the negotiation to gain both consent and execution.
"Yes" is nothing without "How." While an agreement is nice, a contract is better, and a signed check is best. You don't get your profits with the agreement. They come upon implementation. Success isn't the hostage-taker saying, "Yes, we have a deal"; success comes afterward, when the freed hostage says to your face, "Thank you."
In this chapter, I'll show how to drive toward and achieve consent, both with those at the negotiating table and with the invisible forces "underneath" it; distinguish true buy-in from fake acquiescence; and guarantee execution using the Rule of Three.
"Yes" is nothing without "How." While an agreement is nice, a contract is better, and a signed check is best. You don't get your profits with the agreement. They come upon implementation.