he Northeast had rippled through the system, Ryan again labels the negative and then mirrors her answer to encourage her to delve further. "It seems like it's been a hectic day." "There've been a lot of 'irate consumers', you know? I mean, I get it, even though I don't like to be yelled at. A lot of people are trying to get to Austin for the big game." "The big game?" Now let's pause. Up to this point, Ryan has been using labels and mirrors to build a relationship with Wendy. To her, it must seem like idle chatter, though, because he hasn't asked for anything. Unlike the angry couple, Ryan is acknowledging her situation. His words ping-pong between "What's that?" and "I hear you," both of which invite her to elaborate. Now that the empathy has been built, she lets slip a piece of information he can use. "Yeah, all through the weekend. Though who knows how many people will make the flights. The weather's probably going to reroute a lot of people through a lot of different places." Here's where Ryan finally swoops in with an ask. But notice how he acts: not assertive or coldly logical, but with empathy and labeling that acknowledges her situation and tacitly puts them in the same boat. "Well, it seems like you've been handling the rough day pretty well," he says. "I was also affected by the weather delays and missed my connecting flight. It seems like this flight is likely booked solid, but with what you said, maybe someone affected by the weather might miss this connection. Is there any possibility a seat will be open?" Listen to that riff: Label, tactical empathy, label. And only then a request. At this point, Wendy says nothing and begins typing on her computer. Ryan, eager not to talk himself out of a possible deal, engages in some silence. After thirty seconds, Wendy prints a boarding pass and hands it to Ryan, explaining that there were a few seats that were supposed to be filled by people who would now arrive much later than the flight's departure. To make Ryan's success even better, she puts him in Economy Plus seating. All that in under two minutes! The next time you find yourself following an angry customer at a corner store or airplane line, take a moment and practice labels and mirrors on the service person. I promise they won't scream, "Don't try to control me!" and burst into flames—and you might walk away with a little more than you expected. KEY LESSONS As you try to insert the tools of tactical empathy into your daily life, I encourage you to think of them as extensions of natural human interactions and not artificial conversational tics. In any interaction, it pleases us to feel that the other side is listening and acknowledging our situation. Whether you are negotiating a business deal or simply chatting to the person at the supermarket butcher counter, creating an empathetic relationship and encouraging your counterpart to expand on their situation is the basis of healthy human interaction. These tools, then, are nothing less than emotional best practices that help you cure the pervasive ineptitude that marks our most critical conversations in life. They will help you connect and create more meaningful and warm relationships. That they might help you extract what you want is a bonus; human connection is the first goal. With that in mind, I encourage you to take the risk of sprinkling these in every conversation you have. I promise you that they will feel awkward and artificial at first, but keep at it. Learning to walk felt awful Strange, too. As you internalize these techniques, turning the artifice of tactical empathy into a habit and then into an integral part of your personality, keep in mind these lessons from the chapter you've just read: Imagine yourself in your counterpart's situation. The beauty of empathy is that it doesn't demand that you agree with their perspective; you only need to understand and acknowledge it. Labeling the person's words or feelings can help reinforce a positive perception or dynamic without resorting to direct affirmation. Remember, you're dealing with a person who wants to be appreciated and understood. So use labels to reinforce and encourage positive perceptions and dynamics. CHAPTER 4 BEWARE "YES"—MASTER "NO" Let me paint a scenario we've all experienced: You're at home, just before dinner, and the phone rings. It is, no surprise, a telemarketer. He wants to sell you magazine subscriptions, water filters, frozen Argentine beef—to be honest, it doesn't matter, as the script is always the same. After butchering your name, and engaging in some disingenuous pleasantries, he launches into his pitch. The hard sell that comes next is a scripted flowchart designed to cut off your escape routes as it funnels you down a path with no exit but "Yes." "Do you enjoy a nice glass of water from time to time?" "Well, yes, but..." "Me too. And like me, I bet you like crisp, clean water with no chemical aftertaste, like Mother Nature made it." "Well, yes, but..." Compromise and concession, even to the truth, feels like defeat. And "No," well, "No" feels like salvation, like an oasis. You're tempted to use "No" when it's blatantly untrue, just to hear its sweet sound. Now let's think about this selling technique. It's designed to get to "Yes" at all costs, as if "No" were death. And for many of us, it is. We have all these negative connotations with "No." We talk about the rejection of "No," about the fear of hearing it. "No" is the ultimate negative word. But at the end of the day, "Yes" is often a meaningless answer that hides deeper objections (and "Maybe" is even worse). Pushing hard for "Yes" doesn't get a negotiator any closer to resolving the issue or finding a solution that works for both parties. It merely creates a false sense of agreement and understanding, which can lead to misunderstandings, resentment, and ultimately a breakdown in communication. So instead of focusing solely on getting a "Yes" or a "No," it's more productive to focus on understanding the other person's perspective and finding a mutually beneficial solution that meets both parties' needs and concerns.