It was difficult to navigate through the ATM heist, and we learned that this guy's co-conspirators were also hostages, in a way. They were caught up in a bad situation they didn't see coming. It was this "disconnect" among the hostage-takers that helped us drive a wedge between them and put an end to the stalemate.

The leader wanted to make us think he and his partners were taking good care of his hostages, but in reality, the security guard was out of the picture, and the second bank teller had run to the bank basement to hide. Whenever Joe said he wanted to talk to the hostages, the hostage-taker would stall and make it seem like there was this frenzy of activity going on inside the bank, going to ridiculous lengths to tell us how much time and energy he and his cohorts were spending on taking good care of the hostages. Very often, the leader would use this as a reason to put Joe on hold or end a call.

Joe was doing a good job keeping this guy talking but was slightly limited by the negotiating approach that police departments were using at the time. The approach was half MSU - Making Shit Up - and half a sort of sales approach, basically trying to persuade, coerce or manipulate in any way possible. The problem was, we were in too much of a hurry, driving too hard toward a quick solution; trying to be a problem solver instead of a people mover.

Going too fast is one of the mistakes all negotiators are prone to making. If we're too much in a hurry, people can feel as if they're not being heard, and we risk undermining the rapport and trust we've built. There's plenty of research that now validates the passage of time as one of the most important tools for a negotiator. When you slow the process down, you also calm it down. After all, if someone is talking, they're not shooting.

We caught a break when the robbers started making noise about food. Joe was going back and forth with them on what they were going to have and how we were going to get it to them. It became a negotiation in itself. We got it all set up, prepared to send the food in on a kind of robot device, because that's what this guy was comfortable with, but then he did an about-face, said to forget about it. Said they'd found some food inside, so it was just one brick wall after another, one smoke screen after another. It would feel to us like we were making a little progress, then this guy would take an abrupt turn or hang up on us, or change his mind.

Meanwhile, our investigators used the time to run the registration of every one of the dozens of vehicles found nearby on the street, and managed to speak to the owners of every one of them except one - a car belonging to someone named Chris Watts. This became our only lead at the time, and as our endless back-and-forth continued on the phone, we sent a group of investigators to the address on Chris Watts' registration, where they found someone who knew Chris Watts and agreed to come down to the scene of the standoff to possibly identify him.

We still didn't have a visual on the inside, so our eyewitness had to be more of an "earwitness" - and he was able to identify Chris Watts by his voice. We now knew more about our adversary than he thought we did. The NYPD lieutenant came up with a shrewd move to shake things up, replacing Joe on the phone against standard protocol, but it easily could have backfired.

This soothing voice was the key to easing the confrontation. When deliberating on a negotiating strategy or approach, people tend to focus all their energies on what to say or do, but it's how we are (our general demeanor and delivery) that is both the easiest thing to enact and the most immediately effective mode of influence. Our brains don't just process and understand the actions and words of others but their feelings and intentions too, the social meaning of their behavior and their emotions.