not only the DJ voice, but to deliver the mirror in an inquisitive tone. The intention behind most mirrors should be "Please, help me understand." Every time you mirror someone, they will reword what they've said. They will never say it exactly the same way they said it the first time. Ask someone, "What do you mean by that?" and you're likely to incite irritation or defensiveness. A mirror, however, will get you the clarity you want while signaling respect and concern for what the other person is saying.

"Yes," her boss responded, "one for us and one for the customer."

"I'm sorry, so you are saying that the client is asking for a copy and we need a copy for internal use?"

"Actually, I'll check with the client—they haven't asked for anything. But I definitely want a copy. That's just how I do business."

"Absolutely," she responded. "Thanks for checking with the customer. Where would you like to store the in-house copy? There's no more space in the file room here."

"It's fine. You can store it anywhere," he said, slightly perturbed now.

"Anywhere?" she mirrored again, with calm concern.

When another person's tone of voice or body language is inconsistent with his words, a good mirror can be particularly useful. In this case, it caused her boss to take a nice, long pause—something he did not often do. My student sat silent. "As a matter of fact, you can put them in my office," he said, with more composure than he had had the whole conversation.

"I'll get the new assistant to print it for me after the project is done. For now, just create two digital backups."

A day later her boss emailed and wrote simply, "The two digital backups will be fine."

Not long after, I received an ecstatic email from this student: "I was shocked! I love mirrors! A week of work avoided!"

Mirroring will make you feel awkward as heck when you first try it. That's the only hard part about it; the technique takes a little practice. Once you get the hang of it, though, it'll become a conversational Swiss Army knife valuable in just about every professional and social setting.

The language of negotiation is primarily a language of conversation and rapport: a way of quickly establishing relationships and getting people to talk and think together. Which is why when you think of the greatest negotiators of all time, I've got a surprise for you—think Oprah Winfrey. Her daily television show was a case study of a master practitioner at work: on a stage face-to-face with someone she had never met, in front of a crowded studio of hundreds, with millions more watching from home, and a task to persuade that person in front of her, sometimes against his or her own best interests, to talk and talk and keep talking, ultimately sharing with the world deep, dark secrets that they had held hostage in their own minds for a lifetime. Look closely at such an interaction after reading this chapter and suddenly you'll see a refined set of powerful skills: a conscious smile to ease the tension, use of subtle verbal and nonverbal language to signal empathy (and thus security), a certain downward inflection in the voice, embrace of specific kinds of questions and avoidance of others—a whole array of previously hidden skills that will prove invaluable to you, once you've learned to use them.

The key lessons from this chapter to remember:
- A good negotiator prepares, going in to be ready for possible surprises; a great negotiator aims to use her skills to reveal the surprises she is certain to find.
- Don't commit to assumptions; instead, view them as hypotheses and use the negotiation to test them rigorously.
- People who view negotiation as a battle of arguments become overwhelmed by the voices in their head. Negotiation is not an act of battle; it's a process of discovery. The goal is to uncover as much information as possible.
- Mirrors work magic. Repeat the last three words (or the critical one to three words) of what someone has just said. We fear what's different and are drawn to what's similar. Mirroring is the art of insinuating similarity, which facilitates bonding. Use mirrors to encourage the other side to empathize and bond with you, keep people talking, buy your side time to regroup, and encourage your counterparts to reveal their strategy.
- CHAPTER 3 DON'T FEEL THEIR PAIN, LABEL IT I
it was 1998 and I was standing in a narrow hallway outside an apartment on the twenty-seventh floor of a high-rise in Harlem. I was the head of the New York City FBI Crisis Negotiation Team, and that day I was the primary negotiator.

The investigative squad had reported that at least three heavily armed fugitives were holed up inside. Several days earlier, the fugitives had used automatic weapons in a shoot-out with a rival gang, so the New York City FBI SWAT team was arrayed behind me, and our snipers were on nearby rooftops with rifles trained on the apartment windows.

In tense situations like this, the traditional negotiating advice is to keep a poker face. Don't get emotional. Until recently, most academics and researchers completely ignored the role of emotion in negotiation. Emotions were just an obstacle to a good outcome, they said. "Separate the people from the problem" was the common refrain.

But think about that: How can you separate people from the problem when their emotions are the problem? Especially when they are scared people with guns. Emotions are one of the main things that derail communication. Once people get upset at one another, rational thinking goes out the window.

That's why, instead of denying or ignoring emotions, good negotiators identify and influence them. They are able to precisely label emotions, those of others and especially their own. And once they label the emotions they talk about them without getting wound up. For them, emotion is a tool. Emotions aren't the obstacles, they are the means.

The relationship between an emotionally intelligent negotiator and their counterpart is essentially therapeutic. It duplicates that of a psychotherapist with a patient. The psychotherapist prods and pokes to understand his patient's problems, and the emotionally intelligent negotiator does the same thing. They probe and poke to gain insights into the other person's emotions and motivations. By doing this, they are able to build rapport, earn trust, and influence outcomes in a way that is not possible when you're dealing with a purely rational negotiation.

In our next chapter, we will explore how to use storytelling as part of your negotiating strategy.