The text has been repaired into clean, readable English. Here is the corrected version:

Great idea to use this method if there'd been another buyer, but with no one else it was a brilliant way to get Bruno to bid against himself.

KEY LESSONS
Superstar negotiators - real rainmakers - know that a negotiation is a playing field beneath the words where really getting to a good deal involves detecting and manipulating subtle, nonobvious signals beneath the surface. It is only by visualizing and modifying these subsurface issues that you can craft a great deal and make sure it is implemented.

As you put the following tools to use, remember this chapter's most important concept. That is, "Yes" is nothing without "How." Asking "How," knowing "How," and defining "How" are all part of the effective negotiator's arsenal. He would be unarmed without them.

Ask calibrated "How" questions, and ask them again and again. Asking "How" keeps your counterparts engaged but off balance. Answering the questions will give them the illusion of control. It will also lead them to contemplate your problems when making their demands.

Use "How" questions to shape the negotiating environment. You do this by using "How can I do that?" as a gentle version of "No." This will subtly push your counterpart to search for other solutions - your solutions. Very often it will get them to bid against themselves.

Don't just pay attention to the people you're negotiating with directly; always identify the motivations of the players "behind the table." You can do so by asking how a deal will affect everybody else and how on board they are.

Follow the 7-38-55 Percent Rule by paying close attention to tone of voice and body language. Incongruence between the words and nonverbal signs will show when your counterpart is lying or uncomfortable with a deal.

Is the "Yes" real or counterfeit? Test it with the Rule of Three: use calibrated questions, summaries, and labels to get your counterpart to reaffirm their agreement at least three times. It's really hard to repeatedly lie or fake conviction.

A person's use of pronouns offers deep insights into his or her relative authority. If you're hearing a lot of "I," "me," and "my," the real power to decide probably lies elsewhere. Picking up a lot of "we," "they," and "them," it's more likely you're dealing directly with a savvy decision maker keeping his options open.

Use your own name to make yourself a real person to the other side and even get your own personal discount. Humor and humanity are the best ways to break the ice and remove roadblocks. 

CHAPTER 9: BARGAIN HARD
A few years ago, I fell in love with a red Toyota 4Runner. Actually, not just "red," but "Salsa Red Pearl." Kind of a smoldering crimson that went perfectly with my taste and color schemes at the time. There was no doubt about it; this was the car of my dreams.

Most negotiations hit that inevitable point where the slightly loose and informal interplay between two people turns to confrontation and the proverbial "brass tacks." You know the moment: you've mirrored and labeled your way to a degree of rapport; an accusation audit has cleared any lingering mental or emotional obstacles, and you've identified and summarized the interests and positions at stake, eliciting a "That's right," and so forth.

Now it's time to bargain.

Here it is: the clash for cash, an uneasy dance of offers and counters that sends most people into a cold sweat. If you count yourself among that majority, regarding the inevitable moment as nothing more than a necessary evil, there's a good chance you regularly get your clock cleaned by those who have learned to embrace it.

No part of a negotiation induces more anxiety and unfocused aggression than bargaining, which is why it's the part that is more often fumbled and mishandled than any other. It's simply not a comfortable dynamic for most people. Even when we have the best-laid plans, a lot of us wimp out when we get to the moment of exchanging prices.

In this chapter, I'm going to explain the tactics that make up the bargaining process and look at how psychological dynamics determine which tactics should be used and how they should be implemented. Now, bargaining is not rocket science...