Text:

Erase
order. That’s because we focus on the first numbers and extrapolate.
That's not to say, "Never open." Rules like that are easy to remember, but, like most simplistic approaches, they are not always good advice. If you're dealing with a rookie counterpart, you might be tempted to be the shark and throw an extreme anchor. Or if you really know the market and you're dealing with an equally informed pro, you might offer a number just to make the negotiation go faster. Here's my personal advice on whether or not you want to be the shark that eats a rookie counterpart. Just remember, your reputation precedes you. I've run into CEOs whose reputation was to always badly beat their counterpart and pretty soon no one would deal with them. 3. ESTABLISH A RANGE While going first rarely helps, there is one way to seem to make an offer and bend their reality in the process. That is, by alluding to a range. What I mean is this: When confronted with naming your terms or price, counter by recalling a similar deal which establishes your "ballpark," albeit the best possible ballpark you wish to be in. Instead of saying, "I'm worth $110,000," Jerry might have said, "At top places like X Corp., people in this job get between $130,000 and $170,000." That gets your point across without moving the other party into a defensive position. And it gets them thinking at higher levels. Research shows that people who hear extreme anchors unconsciously adjust their expectations in the direction of the opening number. Many even go directly to their price limit. If Jerry had given this range, the firm probably would have offered $130,000 because it looked so cheap next to $170,000. In a recent study, 4 Columbia Business School psychologists found that job applicants who named a range received significantly higher overall salaries than those who offered a number, especially if their range was a "bolstering range," in which the low number in the range was what they actually wanted. Understand, if you offer a range (and it's a good idea to do so) expect them to come in at the low end. 4. PIVOT TO NONMONETARY TERMS People get hung up on "How much?" But don't deal with numbers in isolation. That leads to bargaining, a series of rigid positions defined by emotional views of fairness and pride. Negotiation is a more intricate and subtle dynamic. One of the easiest ways to bend your counterpart's reality to your point of view is by pivoting to nonmonetary terms. After you've anchored them high, you can make your offer seem reasonable by offering things that aren't important to you but could be important to them. Or if their offer is low, you could ask for things that matter more to you than them. Since this is sometimes difficult, what we often do is throw out examples to start the brainstorming process. Not long ago I did some training for the Memphis Bar Association. Normally, for the training they were looking for, I'd charge $25,000. But since learning that the ransom was just party money, I was aiming much lower: $5,000. We were not going to compromise. I advised him to start off by anchoring the conversation in the idea that he didn't have the money, but to do so without saying "No" so as not to hit their pride head-on. The kidnapper made another general threat against the aunt and again demanded the cash. That's when I had the nephew subtly question the fairness. "I'm sorry," the nephew responded, "but how are we supposed to pay if you're going to hurt her?" That brought up the aunt's death, which was the thing the kidnappers most wanted to avoid. They needed to keep her unharmed if they hoped to get any money. Not notice that to this point the nephew hadn't named a price. This game of attrition finally pushed the kidnappers to name a number first. Without prodding, they dropped to $50,000. Now that we had him in our sights, my colleagues and I told the nephew to stand his ground. "How can I come up with that kind of money?" we told him to ask. Again, the kidnapper dropped his demand, to $25,000. Now that we had him in our sights, my colleagues and I told the