The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts.
Repair it into clean, readable English.
Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
u	again.	So	what	do	you	do?
You	provoke	a	“No”	with	this	one-sentence	email.
Have	you	given	up	on	this	project?
The	point	is	that	this	one-sentence	email	encapsulates	the
best	 of	 “No”-oriented	 questions	 and	 plays	 on	 your
counterpart’s	 natural	 human	 aversion	 to	 loss.	 The	 “No”
answer	the	email	demands	offers	the	other	party	the	feeling
of	safety	and	the	illusion	of	control	while	encouraging	them
to	define	their	position	and	explain	it	to	you.
Just	 as	 important,	 it	 makes	 the	 implicit	 threat	 that	 you
will	walk	 away	on	your	own	 terms.	 To	 stop	 that	from
happening—to	cut	their	losses	and	prove	their	power—the /******/other	party’s	natural	inclination	is	to	reply	immediately	and
disagree.	
No,	 our	 priorities	 haven’t	 changed.	 We’ve	 just
gotten	bogged	down	and	.	.	.
If	 you’re	 a	 parent,	 you	 already	use	this	technique
instinctively.	What	 do	 you	do	when	 your	kids	 won’t	 leave
the	house/park/mall?	You	say,	“Fine.	I’m	leaving,”	and	you
begin	 to	 walk	 away.	 I’m	 going	 to	 guess	 that	 well	 over	 half
the	time	they	yell,	“No,	wait!”	and	run	to	catch	up.	No	one
likes	to	be	abandoned.
Now,	this	may	seem	like	a	rude	way	to	address	someone
in	business,	but	you	have	to	get	over	that.	It’s	not	rude,	and
though	 it’s	 direct,	 it’s	 cloaked	 with	 the	 safety	 of	 “No.”
Ignoring	you	is	what’s	rude.	I	can	tell	you	that	I’ve	used	this
successfully	 not	 just	 in	 North	America,	 but	 with	 people	 in
two	 different	 cultures	 (Arabic	 and	 Chinese)	 famous	 for
never	saying	“No.”
KEY	LESSONS
Using	 this	 chapter’s	 tools	in	 daily	 life	 is	 difficult	 for	 many
people	 because	 they	 go	 directly	 against	 one	 of	 society’s
biggest	social	dictums.	That	is,	“Be	nice.”
We’ve	 instrumentalized	 niceness	as	 a	 way	 to	 gain	 approval	 and
influence,	 but	 the	 truth	is	that	it	doesn’t	work	very	well.	Only	by
understanding	and	respecting	the	other	person’s	needs	and	concerns	can	we
truly	change	their	behavior.
CHAPTER	5
TRIGGER	THE	TWO	WORDS
THAT	IMMEDIATELY
TRANSFORM	ANY
NEGOTIATION
I
n	August	2000,	the	militant	Islamic	group	Abu	Sayyaf,	in
the	 southern	 Philippines,	 broadcast	 that	 it	 had	 captured	 a
CIA	agent.	The	truth	was	not	as	newsworthy,	or	as	valuable
to	the	rebels.
Abu	 Sayyaf	 had	 kidnapped	 Jeffrey	 Schilling,	 a	 twenty-
four-year-old	American	who	had	traveled	near	their	base	in
Jolo	Island.	A	California	native,	Schilling	became	a	hostage
with	a	$10	million	price	tag	on	his	head.
At	 the	 time	 I	 was	 a	 Supervisory	 Special	 Agent	 (SSA)
attached	 to	 the	 FBI’s	 elite	 Crisis	 Negotiation	 Unit	 (CNU).
The	 CNU	 is	 the	 equivalent	 of	 the	 special	 forces	 of
negotiations.	 It’s	 attached	 to	 the	 FBI’s	 Hostage	 Rescue
Team	 (HRT).	 Both	 are	 national	 counterterrorist	 response
assets.	They	are	the	best	of	the	best.
The	 CNU	 is	 based	 at	 the	 FBI	 Academy	 in	 Quantico,
Virginia.	The	 FBI	Academy	 has	 come	 to	 be	 known	 by	 the
one	 word,	 “Quantico.”	 Rightly	 or	 wrongly,	 Quantico	 has	 developed	the	 reputation	as	one	of	the	centers,	if	 not	
the	center	of	knowledge,	for	law	 enforcement.	 When	 a
negotiation	 is	 going	 badly	 and	 the	 negotiators	 involved	 are
directed	to	call	and	find	out	what	“Quantico”	has	to	say,	the
CNU	is	who	they	call.
CNU	 developed	 what	 is	 a	 powerful	 staple	 in	 the	 high-
stakes	 world	of	crisis	negotiation,	the	 Behavioral	 Change
Stairway	Model	(BCSM).	The	model	proposes	five	stages—
active	listening,	empathy,	rapport,	influence,	and	behavioral
change—that	take	any	negotiator	from	listening	to
influencing	behavior.
The	origins	of	the	model	can	be	traced	back	to	the	great
American	psychologist	Carl	Rogers,	who	proposed	that	real
change	can	only	come	when	a	therapist	accepts	the	client	as
he	or	she	is—an	approach	known	as	unconditional	positive
regard.	 The	 vast	 majority	 of	 us,	 however,	 as	 Rogers
explained,	come	 to	 expect	 that	love,	 praise,	 and	 approval
are	 dependent	 on	saying	and	doing	the	things	people
(initially,	our	parents)	consider	correct.	That	is,	because	for
most	of	us	the	positive	regard	we	experience	is	conditional,
we	develop	a	habit	of	hiding	who	we	really	are	and	what	we
really	think,	instead	calibrating	our	words	to	gain	approval
but	disclosing	little.
Which	 is	 why	 so	 few	 social	 interactions	 lead	to	actual
behavior	 change.	 Consider	 the	 typical	 patient	with	severe
coronary	 heart	 disease	 recovering	from	open-heart	surgery.
The	 doctor	tells	the	patient:	“This	surgery	isn’t	a	cure.	The
only	way	to	truly	prolong	your	life	is	to	make	the	following
behavior	changes	.	.	.”	The	grateful	patient	responds:	“Yes,
yes,	yes,	of	course,	Doctor!	This	is	my	second	chance.	I	will
change!”
And	 do	 they?	 Study	 after	 study	 has	 shown	that,	 no,
nothing	changes;	two	years	after	their	operation,	more	than
90	percent	of	patients	haven’t	changed	their	lifestyle	at	all.
Though	th