"Try it with a peer, a subordinate, and a friend. Observe their reactions and tell me if you don't find some level of defensiveness across the spectrum. Don't do this too much, though, or you'll lose your job and all your friends. The only time I say, "Why did you do that?" in a negotiation is when I want to knock someone back. It's an iffy technique, though, and I wouldn't advocate it. There is, however, another way to use 'Why?' effectively. The idea is to employ the defensiveness the question triggers to get your counterpart to defend your position. I know it sounds weird, but it works. The basic format goes like this: When you want to flip a dubious counterpart to your side, ask them, "Why would you do that?" but in a way that the 'that' favors you. Let me explain. If you are working to lure a client away from a competitor, you might say, "Why would you ever do business with me? Why would you ever change from your existing supplier? They're great!" In these questions, the 'Why?' coaxes your counterpart into working for you. 'I' Messages Using the first-person singular pronoun is another great way to set a boundary without escalating into confrontation. When you say, "I'm sorry, that doesn't work for me," the word 'I' strategically focuses your counterpart's attention onto you long enough for you to make a point. The traditional 'I' message is to use 'I' to hit the pause button and step out of a bad dynamic. When you want to counteract unproductive statements from your counterpart, you can say, "I feel ___ when you ___ because ___," and that demands a time-out from the other person. But be careful with the big 'I': You have to be mindful not to use a tone that is aggressive or creates an argument. It's got to be cool and level. No Neediness: Having the Ready-to-Walk Mindset We've said previously that no deal is better than a bad deal. If you feel you can't say 'No,' then you've taken yourself hostage. Once you're clear on what your bottom line is, you have to be willing to walk away. Never be needy for a deal. Before we move on, I want to emphasize how important it is to maintain a collaborative relationship even when you're setting boundaries. Your response must always be expressed in the form of strong, yet empathic, limit-setting boundaries—that is, tough love—not as hatred or violence. Anger and other strong emotions can on rare occasions be effective. But only as calculated acts, never a personal attack. In any bare-knuckle bargaining session, the most vital principle to keep in mind is never to look at your counterpart as an enemy. The person across the table is never the problem. The unsolved issue is. So focus on the issue. This is one of the most basic tactics for avoiding emotional escalations. Our culture demonizes people in movies and politics, which creates the mentality that if we only got rid of the person then everything would be okay. But this dynamic is toxic to any negotiation. Punching back is a last resort. Before you go there, I always suggest an attempt at de-escalating the situation. Suggest a time-out. When your counterparts step back and take a breath, they'll no longer feel that they are hostage to a bad situation. They'll regain a sense of agency and power. And they'll appreciate you for it. The Ackerman Model is an offer-counteroffer method, at least on the surface. But it is a very effective system for beating the usual lackluster bargaining dynamic, which has the predictable result of meeting in the middle. The systematized and easy-to-remember process has only four steps: 1. Set your target price (your goal). 2. Set your first offer at 65 percent of your target price. 3. Calculate three raises of decreasing increments (to 85, 95, and 100 percent). 4. Use lots of empathy and different ways of saying 'No' to get the other side to counter before you increase your offer. 5. When calculating the final amount, use precise, nonround numbers like, say, $37,893 rather than $38,000. It gives the number credibility and weight. 6. On your final number, throw in a nonmonetary item (that they probably don't want) to show you're at your limit. The genius of this system is that it incorporates the psychological tactics we've discussed—reciprocity, extreme anchors, loss aversion, and so on—without you needing to think about them."