When you turn the responses back onto the patient to get them to go deeper and change their behavior, that's exactly what good negotiators do. Getting to this level of emotional intelligence demands opening up your senses, talking less, and listening more. You can learn almost everything you need—and a lot more than other people would like you to know—simply by watching and listening, keeping your eyes peeled and your ears open, and your mouth shut. Think about the therapist's couch as you read the following sections. You'll see how a soothing voice, close listening, and a calm repetition of the words of your "patient" can get you a lot further than a cold, rational argument. It may sound touchy-feely, but if you can perceive the emotions of others, you have a chance to turn them to your advantage. The more you know about someone, the more power you have. TACTICAL EMPATHY We had one big problem that day in Harlem: no telephone number to call into the apartment. So for six straight hours, relieved periodically by two FBI agents who were learning crisis negotiation, I spoke through the apartment door. I used my late-night FM DJ voice. I didn't give orders in my DJ voice, or ask what the fugitives wanted. Instead, I imagined myself in their place. "It looks like you don't want to come out," I said repeatedly. "It seems like you worry that if you open the door, we'll come in with guns blazing. It looks like you don't want to go back to jail." For six hours, we got no response. The FBI coaches loved my DJ voice. But was it working? And then, when we were almost completely convinced that no one was inside, a sniper on an adjacent building radioed that he saw one of the curtains in the apartment move. The front door of the apartment slowly opened. A woman emerged with her hands in front of her. I continued talking. All three fugitives came out. None of them said a word until we had them in handcuffs. Then I asked them the question that was most nagging: Why did they come out after six hours of radio silence? Why did they finally give in? All three gave me the same answer. "We didn't want to get caught or get shot, but you calm us down," they said. "We finally believed you wouldn't go away, so we just came out." There is nothing more frustrating or disruptive to any negotiation than getting the feeling you are talking to someone who isn't listening. Playing dumb is a valid negotiating technique, and "I don't understand" is a legitimate response. But ignoring the other party's position only builds up frustration and makes them less likely to do what you want. The opposite of that is tactical empathy. In my negotiating course, I tell my students that empathy is "the ability to recognize the perspective of a counterpart, and the vocalization of that recognition." That's an academic way of saying that empathy is paying attention to another human being, asking what they are feeling, and making a commitment to understanding their world. Notice I didn't say anything about agreeing with the other person's values and beliefs or giving out hugs. That's sympathy. What I'm talking about is trying to understand a situation from another person's perspective. One step beyond that is tactical empathy. Tactical empathy is understanding the feelings and mindset of another in the moment and also hearing what is behind those feelings so you increase your influence in all the moments that follow. It's emotional intelligence on steroids. As a cop in Kansas City, I was curious about how a select handful of veteran cops managed to talk angry, violent people out of fights or to get them to put down their knives and guns. When I asked how they did that, I rarely got more than a shrug. They couldn't articulate what they did. But now I know the answer is tactical empathy. They were able to think from another person's point of view while they were talking with that person and quickly assess what was driving them. Most of us enter verbal combat unlikely to persuade anyone of anything, but if you want to increase your neural resonance skills, take a moment right now and practice. Turn your attention to someone who's talking near you or watch a person being interviewed on TV. As they talk, imagine that you are that person. Visualize yourself in the position they describe and put in as much detail as you can, as if you were actually there. But be warned, a lot of classic deal makers will think your approach is softheaded and weak. Just ask former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. A few years ago during a speech at Georgetown University, Clinton advocated, "Showing respect, even for one's enemies. Trying to understand and, insofar as psychologically possible, empathize with their perspective and point of view." You can predict what happened next. A gaggle of pundits and politicians pounced on her. They called her statement inane and naive, and even a sign she had embraced the Muslim Brotherhood. Some said that she had blown her chances at a presidential run. The problem with all of that hot air is that she was right. Politics aside, empathy is not about being nice or agreeing with the other side. It's about understanding them. Empathy helps us learn the position the enemy is in, why their actions make sense (to them), and what might move them.