Negotiating a Rent Cut After Receiving Notice of an Increase
Eight months after a Georgetown MBA student named Mishary signed a rental contract for $1,850/month, he got some unwelcome news: his landlord informed him that if he wanted to re-up, it would be $2,100/month for ten months, or $2,000/month for a year. Mishary loved the place and didn't think he'd find a better one, but the price was already high and he couldn't afford more.
Taking to heart our class slogan, "You fall to your highest level of preparation," he dove into the real estate listings and found that prices for comparable apartments were $1,800-$1,950/month, but none of them were in as good a building. He then examined his own finances and figured the rent he wanted to pay was $1,830.
He requested a sit-down with his rental agent. This was going to be tough.
At their meeting, Mishary laid out his situation. His experience in the building had been really positive, he said. And, he pointed out, he always paid on time. It would be sad for him to leave, he said, and sad for the landlord to lose a good tenant. The agent nodded.
"Totally in agreement," he said. "That's why I think it will benefit both of us to agree on renewing the lease."
Here Mishary pulled out his research: buildings around the neighborhood were offering much lower prices, he said. "Even though your building is better in terms of location and services, how do you price lease renewals?"
The agent didn't say anything shocking—merely that they used factors like area prices and supply-and-demand—but that gave Mishary the opening to argue that his leaving would open the landlord to the risk of having an unrented apartment and the cost of repainting. One month unrented would be a $2,000 loss, he said.
Then he made another offer. Now, you're probably shaking your head that he's making two offers without receiving one in return. And you're right; normally that's verboten. But you have to be able to improvise. If you feel in control of a negotiation, you can do two or three moves at a time. Don't let the rules ruin the flow.
"Let me try and move along with you: how about $1,790 for 12 months?"