At home are negotiations that boil down to the expression of a simple, animalistic urge: I want. "I want you to free the hostages," is a very relevant one to this book, of course. But so is: "I want you to accept that $1 million contract." "I want to pay $20,000 for that car." "I want you to give me a 10 percent raise." and "I want you to go to sleep at 9 p.m." Negotiation serves two distinct, vital life functions—information gathering and behavior influencing—and includes almost any interaction where each party wants something from the other side. Your career, your finances, your reputation, your love life, even the fate of your kids—at some point all of these hinge on your ability to negotiate. Negotiation as you'll learn it here is nothing more than communication with results. Getting what you want out of life is all about getting what you want from—and with—other people. Conflict between two parties is inevitable in all relationships. So, it's useful—crucial, even—to know how to engage in that conflict to get what you want without inflicting damage. In this book, I draw on my more than two-decade career in the Federal Bureau of Investigation to distill the principles and practices I deployed in the field into an exciting new approach designed to help you disarm, redirect, and dismantle your counterpart in virtually any negotiation. And to do so in a relationship-affirming way. Yes, you'll learn how we negotiated the safe release of countless hostages. But you'll also learn how to use a deep understanding of human psychology to negotiate a lower car price, a bigger raise, and a child's bedtime. This book will teach you to reclaim control of the conversations that inform your life and career. The first step to achieving a mastery of daily negotiation is to get over your aversion to negotiating. You don't need to like it; you just need to understand that's how the world works. Negotiating does not mean browbeating or grinding someone down. It simply means playing the emotional game that human society is set up for. In this world, you get what you ask for; you just have to ask correctly. So claim your prerogative to ask for what you think is right. What this book is really about, then, is getting you to accept negotiation and in doing so learn how to get what you want in a psychologically aware way. You'll learn to use your emotions, instincts, and insights in any encounter to connect better with others, influence them, and achieve more. Effective negotiation is applied people smarts, a psychological edge in every domain of life: how to size someone up, how to influence their sizing up of you, and how to use that knowledge to get what you want. But beware: this is not another pop-psych book. It's a deep and thoughtful (and most of all, practical) take on leading psychological theory that distills lessons from a twenty-four-year career in the FBI and ten years teaching and consulting in the best business schools and corporations in the world. And it works for one simple reason: it was designed in—and for—the real world. It was not born in a classroom or a training hall, but built from years of experience that improved it until it reached near perfection. Remember, a hostage negotiator plays a unique role: he has to win. Can he say to a bank robber, "Okay, you've taken four hostages. Let's split the difference—give me two, and we'll call it a day?" No. A successful hostage negotiator has to get everything he asks for, without giving anything back of substance, and do so in a way that leaves the adversaries feeling as if they have a great relationship. His work is emotional intelligence on steroids. Those are the tools you'll learn here. The Book Like a contractor building a house, this book is constructed from the ground up: first comes the big slabs of foundation, then the necessary load-bearing walls, the elegant but impermeable roof, and the lovely focus on what the other party has to say. Chapter 2 will delve into Tactical Empathy. You'll learn how to recognize your counterpart's perspective and then gain trust and understanding through Labeling—that is, by repeating that perspective back to them. You'll also learn how to defuse negative dynamics by bringing them into the open. Finally, I'll explain how to disarm your counterpart's complaints about you by speaking them aloud in an Accusation Audit. Next, in Chapter 3, I'll examine ways to make your counterpart feel understood and positively affirmed in a negotiation in order to create an atmosphere of unconditional positive regard. Here, you'll learn why you should strive for "That's right" instead of "Yes" at every stage of a negotiation, and how to identify, rearticulate, and emotionally affirm your counterpart's worldview with Summaries and Paraphrasing. Chapter 4 teaches the flip side of Getting to Yes. You'll learn why it's vitally important to get to "No" because "No" starts the negotiation. You'll also discover how to step out of your ego and negotiate in your counterpart's world, the only way to achieve an agreement they will implement. Finally, you'll see how to engage your counterpart by acknowledging their right to choose, and you'll learn an email technique that ensures that you'll never be ignored again. In Chapter 5, I demonstrate how to employ these Calibrated Questions to guard against failures in the implementation phase. "Yes," as I always say, is nothing without "How?" You'll also discover the importance of nonverbal communication; how to use "How" questions to gently say "No"; how to get your counterparts to bid against themselves; and how to influence the deal killers when they're not at the table. At a certain point, every negotiation gets down to the brass tacks: that is, to old-school haggling. Chapter 6 offers a step-by-step process for effective bargaining, from how to prepare to how to dodge deadlines and create urgency; employ the idea of fairness to nudge your counterpart; and anchor their emotions so that not accepting your offer feels like a loss. After this, Chapter 7 is dedicated to that incredibly powerful tool I used at Harvard: Calibrated Questions, the queries that begin with "How?" or "What?" By eliminating "Yes" and "No" answers they force your counterpart to apply their mental energy to solving your problems. In Chapter 8, I demonstrate how to employ these Calibrated Questions to influence the deal killers when they're not at the table.