ted he was the wrong guy. He admitted that his division was a mess and he'd have to hand things off to somebody else to get the deal done. And he did. It took more than a year to get the deal signed, but they did it.

Observing unguarded moments is also effective during unguarded moments at the fringes, whether at meals like my client had with his Coca-Cola contact, or the brief moments of relaxation before or after formal interactions. During a typical business meeting, the first few minutes, before you actually get down to business, and the last few moments, as everyone is leaving, often tell you more about the other side than anything in between. That's why reporters have a credo to never turn off their recorders: you always get the best stuff at the beginning and the end of an interview.

Also pay close attention to your counterpart during interruptions, odd exchanges, or anything that interrupts the flow. When someone breaks ranks, people's façades crack just a little. Simply noticing whose cracks and how others respond verbally and nonverbally can reveal a gold mine. 

When it doesn't make sense, there's cents to be made. Students often ask me whether Black Swans are specific kinds of information or any kind that helps. I always answer that they are anything that you don't know that changes things.

To drive this home, here's the story of one of my MBA students who was interning for a private equity real estate firm in Washington. Faced with actions from his counterpart that didn't pass the sense test, he innocently turned up one of the greatest Black Swans I've seen in years by using a label.

My student had been performing due diligence on potential targets when a principal at the firm asked him to look into a mixed-use property in the heart of Charleston, South Carolina. He had no experience in the Charleston market, so he called the broker selling the property and requested the marketing package.

After discussing the deal and the market, my student and his boss decided that the asking price of $4.3 million was about $450,000 too high. At that point, my student called the broker again to discuss pricing and next steps. After initial pleasantries, the broker asked my student what he thought of the property.

"It looks like an interesting property," he said. "Unfortunately, we don't know the market fundamentals. We like downtown and King Street in particular, but we have a lot of questions."

The broker then told him that he had been in the market for more than fifteen years, so he was well informed. At this point, my student pivoted to calibrated "How" and "What" questions in order to gather information and judge the broker's skills.

"Great," my student said. "First and foremost, how has Charleston been affected by the economic downturn?" The broker replied with a detailed answer, citing specific examples of market improvement. In the process, he showed my student that he was very knowledgeable.

"It sounds like I'm in good hands!" he said, using a label to build empathy. "Next question: What sort of cap rate can be expected in this type of building?" Through the ensuing back-and-forth, my student learned that owners could expect rates of 6 to 7 percent because buildings like this were popular with students at the local university, a growing school where 60 percent of the student body lived off campus.

He also learned that it would be prohibitively expensive — if not physically impossible — to buy land nearby and build a similar building. In the last five years, no one had built on the street because of historic preservation rules. Even if they could buy land, the broker said a similar building would cost $2.5 million just in construction.

"The building is in great shape, especially compared to the other options available to students," he said. "If he or she is selling such a cash cow, it seems like the seller must have doubts about future market fundamentals," he said.

"Well," he said, "the seller has some tougher properties in Atlanta and Savannah, so he has to get out of this property to pay back the other mortgages." Bingo! With that, my student had unearthed a fantastic Black Swan. The seller was suffering constraints that, until that moment, had been unknown.

My student put the broker on mute as he described other properties and used the moment to discuss pricing with his boss. He quickly gave him the green light to make a lowball offer—an extreme anchor—to try to yank the broker to his minimum.

After quizzing the broker if the seller would be willing to close quickly, my student set his anchor. "I think I have heard enough," he said. "We are willing to offer $3.4 million."

"Okay," the broker answered. "That is well below the asking price. However, I can bring the offer to the seller and see what he thinks." Later that day, the broker came back with a counteroffer. The seller had told him that the number was too low, but he was willing to take $3.7 million. My student could barely keep from falling off his chair; the counteroffer was lower than his goal. But rather than jump at the amount—and risk leaving value on the table with a wimp-win deal—my student pushed further.

He said "No" without using the word. "That is closer to what we believe the value to be, but we cannot in good conscience pay more than $3.55 million." (Later, my student told me—and I agreed—that he should have used a label or calibrated question here to push the broker to bid against himself. But he was so surprised by how far the price had dropped that he stumbled into old-school haggling.)

"I am only authorized to go down to $3.6 million," the broker answered, clearly showing that he'd never taken a negotiation class that taught the Ackerman model and how to pivot to terms to avoid the haggle. My student's boss signaled to him that $3.6 million worked and he agreed to the price.

I've teased several of the techniques my student used to effectively negotiate a great deal for his firm, from the use of labels and calibrated questions to the probing of constraints to unearth a beautiful Black Swan. It also bears noting that my student did tons of work beforehand and had prepared labels and questions so that he was ready to jump on the Black Swan when the broker offered it. Once he knew what the Black Swan was, the rest became much easier.