Routledge Classics contains the very best of Routledge
publishing over the past century or so, books that have,
by popular consent, become established as classics in
their field. Drawing on a fantastic heritage of innovative
writing published by Routledge and its associated
imprints, this series makes available in attractive,
affordable form some of the most important works of
modern times.
For a complete list of titles visit
www.routledgeclassics.comThe Road to Serfdom
'This book has become a true classic: essential reading
for everyone who is seriously interested in politics in
the broadest and least partisan sense.'
Milton Friedman
'This book should be read by everybody. It is no use
saying that there are a great many people who are not
interested in politics; the political issue discussed
by Dr Hayek concerns every single member of the
community.'
The ListenerFirst published 1944
by George Routledge & Sons
First published in Routledge Classics 2001
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, OX14 4RN
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Reprinted 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006
Routledgeis an imprintofthe TaylorCJ( Francis Group, an informabusiness
© 1944 F. A. Hayek
Typeset in Joanna by RefineCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
TJ International Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
British LibraryCataloguingin PublicationData
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 10: 0-415-25543-0 (hbk)
ISBN 10: 0-415-25389-6 (pbk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-25543-1 (hbk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-25389-5 (pbk)CONTENTS
PREFACE vii
Introduction
1 The Abandoned Road 10
2 The Great Utopia 24
3 Individualism and Collectivism 33
4 The "Inevitability" of Planning 45
5 Planning and Democracy 59
6 Planning and the Rule of Law 75
7 Economic Control and Totalitarianism 91
8 Who, Whom? 1°5
9 Security and Freedom 123
10 Why the Worst Get on Top 138
11 The End of Truth 157
12 The Socialist Roots of Nazism 171
13 The Totalitarians in our Midst 186
14 Material Conditions and Ideal Ends 207
15 The Prospects of International Order 225vi CONTENTS
Co N C LUS ION
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
IN DEX
245
247
251PREFACE
When a professional student of social affairs writes a political
book, his first duty is plainly to say so. This is a political book. I
do not wish to disguise this by describing it, as I might perhaps
have done, by the more elegant and ambitious name of an essay
in social philosophy. But, whatever the name, the essential point
remains that all I shall have to say is derived from certain ultim­
ate values. I hope I have adequately discharged in the book itself
a second and no less important duty: to make it clear beyond
doubt what these ultimate values are on which the whole
argument depends.
There is, however, one thing I want to add to this. Though this
is a political book, I am as certain as anyone can be that the
beliefs set out in it are not determined by my personal interests. I
can discover no reason why the kind of society which seems to
me desirable should offer greater advantages to me than to the
great majority of the people of this country. In fact, I am always
told by my socialist colleagues that as an economist I should
occupy a much more important position in the kind of society toviii PREFACE
which I am opposed-provided, of course, that I could bring
myself to accept their views. I feel equally certain that my opposi­
tion to these views is not due to their being different from those
with which I have grown up, since they are the very views which
I held as a young man and which have led me to make the study
of economics my profession. For those who, in the current fash­
ion, seek interested motives in every profession of a political
opinion, I may, perhaps, be allowed to add that I have every
possible reason for not writing or publishing this book. It is
certain to offend many people with whom I wish to live on
friendly terms; it has forced me to put aside work for which I
feel better qualified and to which I attach greater importance in
the long run; and, above all, it is certain to prejudice the recep­
tion of the results of the more strictly academic work to which
all my inclinations lead me.
If in spite of this I have come to regard the writing of this
book as a duty which I must not evade, this was mainly due to a
peculiar and serious feature of the discussions of problems of
future economic policy at the present time, of which the public
is scarcely suffiCiently aware. This is the fact that the majority of
economists have now for some years been absorbed by the war
machine, and silenced by their official positions, and that in
consequence public opinion on these problems is to an alarming
extent guided by amateurs and cranks, by people who have an
axe to grind or a pet panacea to sell. In these circumstances one
who still has the leisure for literary work is hardly entitled to
keep to himself apprehensions which current tendencies must
create in the minds of many who cannot publicly express
them-though in different circumstances I should have gladly
left the discussion of questions of national policy to those who
are both better authorised and better qualified for the task.
The central argument of this book was first sketched in an
article entitled "Freedom and the Economic System," which
appeared in the ContemporaryReview for April, 1938, and was laterPREFACE ix
reprinted in an enlarged form as one of the "Public Policy
Pamphlets", edited by Professor H. D. Gideonse for the
University of Chicago Press (1939). I have to thank the editors
and publishers of both these publications for permission to
reproduce certain passages from them.
London School of Economics,
Cambridge,December, 1943INTRODUCTION
Few discoveries are more irritating than those which expose
the pedigree of ideas.
Lord Acton.
Contemporary events differ from history in that we do not know
the results they will produce. Looking back, we can assess the
significance of past occurrences and trace the consequences they
have brought in their train. But while history runs its course, it is
not history to us. It leads us into an unknown land and but rarely
can we get a glimpse of what lies ahead. It would be different if
it were given to us to live a second time through the same events
with all the knowledge of what we have seen before. How differ­
ent would things appear to us, how important and often alarm­
ing would changes seem that we now scarcely notice! It is
probably fortunate that man can never have this experience
and knows of no laws which history must obey.
Yet, although history never quite repeats itself, and just
because no development is inevitable, we can in a measure learn2 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
from the past to avoid a repetition of the same process. One need
not be a prophet to be aware of impending dangers. An acci­
dental combination of experience and interest will often reveal
events to one man under aspects which few yet see.
The following pages are the product of an experience as near
as possible to twice living through the same period-or at least
twice watching a very similar evolution of ideas. While this is an
experience one is not likely to gain in one country, it may in
certain circumstances be acquired by living in turn for long
periods in different countries. Though the influences to which
the trend of thought is subject in most civilised nations are to a
large extent similar, they do not necessarily operate at the same
time or at the same speed. Thus, by moving from one country to
another, one may sometimes twice watch similar phases of intel­
lectual development. The senses have then become peculiarly
acute. When one hears for a second time opinions expressed or
measures advocated which one has first met twenty or twenty­
five years ago, they assume a new meaning as symptoms of a
definite trend. They suggest, if not the necessity, at least the
probability, that developments will take a similar course.
It is necessary now to state the unpalatable truth that it is
Germany whose fate we are in some danger of repeating. The
danger is not immediate, it is true, and conditions in this coun­
try are still so remote from those witnessed in recent years in
Germany as to make it difficult to believe that we are moving in
the same direction. Yet, though the road be long, it is one on
which it becomes more difficult to turn back as one advances. If
in the long run we are the makers of our own fate, in the short
run we are the captives of the ideas we have created. Only if we
recognise the danger in time can we hope to avert it.
It is not to the Germany of Hitler, the Germany of the present
war, that this country bears yet any resemblance. But students of
the currents of ideas can hardly fail to see that there is more than
a superficial similarity between the trend of thought in GermanyINTRODUCTION 3
during and after the last war and the present current of ideas in
this country. There exists now in this country certainly the same
determination that the organisation of the nation we have
achieved for purposes of defence shall be retained for the
purposes of creation. There is the same contempt for nineteenth­
century liberalism, the same spurious "realism" and even cyni­
cism, the same fatalistic acceptance of "inevitable trends". And at
least nine out of every ten of the lessons which our most vocif­
erous reformers are so anxious we should learn from this war are
precisely the lessons which the Germans did learn from the last
war and which have done much to produce the Nazi system. We
shall have opportunity in the course of this book to show that
there are a large number of other points where, at an interval of
fifteen to twenty-five years, we seem to follow the example of
Germany. Although one does not like to be reminded, it is not so
many years since the socialist policy of that country was gener­
ally held up by progressives as an example to be imitated, just as
in more recent years Sweden has been the model country to
which progressive eyes were directed. All those whose memory
goes further back know how deeply, for at least a generation
before the last war, German thought and German practice
influenced ideals and policy in this country.
The author has spent about half of his adult life in his native
Austria, in close touch with German intellectual life, and the
other half in the United States and England. In the dozen years in
which this country has now become his home he has become
increasingly convinced that at least some of the forces which
have destroyed freedom in Germany are also at work here, and
that the character and the source of this danger are, if possible,
even less understood than they were in Germany. The supreme
tragedy is still not seen that in Germany it was largely people of
goodwill, men who were admired and held up as models in this
country, who prepared the way, if they did not actually create,
the forces which now stand for everything they detest. Yet our4 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
chance of averting a similar fate depends on our facing the dan­
ger and on our being prepared to revise even our most cherished
hopes and ambitions if they should prove to be the source of the
danger. There are few signs yet that we have the intellectual
courage to admit to ourselves that we may have been wrong. Few
are ready to recognise that the rise of Fascism and Nazism was
not a reaction against the socialist trends of the preceding
period, but a necessary outcome of those tendencies. This is a
truth which most people were unwilling to see even when the
similarities of many of the repellent features of the internal
regimes in communist Russia and national-socialist Germany
were widely recognised. As a result, many who think themselves
infinitely superior to the aberrations of Nazism and sincerely
hate all its manifestations, work at the same time for ideals
whose realisation would lead straight to the abhorred tyranny.
All parallels between developments in different countries are,
of course, deceptive; but I am not basing my argument mainly
on such parallels. Nor am I arguing that these developments are
inevitable. If they were, there would be no point in writing this.
They can be prevented if people realise in time where their
efforts may lead. But till recently there was little hope that any
attempt to make them see the danger would be successful. It
seems, however, as if the time were now ripe for a fuller discus­
sion of the whole issue. Not only is the problem now more
widely recognised, there are also special reasons which at this
juncture make it imperative that we should face the issues
squarely.
It will, perhaps, be said that this is not the time to raise an
issue on which opinions clash sharply. But the socialism of
which we speak is not a party matter, and the questions which
we are discussing have little to do with the questions at dispute
between political parties. It does not affect our problem that
some groups may want less socialism than others, that some
want socialism mainly in the interest of one group and others inINTRODUCTION 5
that of another. The important point is that, if we take the people
whose views influence developments, they are now in this coun­
try in some measure all socialists. If it is no longer fashionable to
emphasise that uwe are all socialists now", this is so merely
because the fact is too obvious. Scarcely anybody doubts that we
must continue to move towards socialism, and most people are
merely trying to deflect this movement in the interest of a
particular class or group.
It is because nearly everybody wants it that we are moving in
this direction. There are no objective facts which make it inevit­
able. We shall have to say something about the alleged inevit­
ability of uplanning" later. The main question is where this
movement will lead us. Is it not possible that if the people whose
convictions now give it an irresistible momentum began to see
what only a few yet apprehend, they would recoil in horror and
abandon the quest which for half a century has engaged so many
people of goodwill? Where these common beliefs of our gener­
ation will lead us is a problem not for one party but for every
one of us, a problem of the most momentous significance. Is
there a greater tragedy imaginable than that in our endeavour
consciously to shape our future in accordance with high ideals,
we should in fact unwittingly produce the very opposite of what
we have been striving for?
There is an even more pressing reason why at this time we
should seriously endeavour to understand the forces which have
created National Socialism: that this will enable us to understand
our enemy and the issue at stake between us. It cannot be denied
that there is yet little recognition of the positive ideals for which
we are fighting. We know that we are fighting for freedom to
shape our life according to our own ideas. That is a great deal,
but not enough. It is not enough to give us the firm beliefs
which we need to resist an enemy who uses propaganda as one
of his main weapons not only in the most blatant but also in the
most subtle forms. It is still more insufficient when we have to6 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
counter this propaganda among the people in the countries
under his control and elsewhere, where the effect of this propa­
ganda will not disappear with the defeat of the Axis powers. It is
not enough if we are to show to others that what we are fighting
for is worth their support, and not enough to guide us in the
building of a new Europe safe against the dangers to which the
old one has succumbed.
It is a lamentable fact that the English in their dealings with
the dictators before the war, not less than in their attempts at
propaganda and in the discussion of their war aims, have shown
an inner insecurity and uncertainty of aim which can be
explained only by confusion about their own ideals and the
nature of the differences which separated them from the enemy.
We have been misled as much because we have refused to believe
that the enemy was sincere in the profession of some beliefs
which we shared as because we believed in the sincerity of some
of his other claims. Have not the parties of the Left as well as
those of the Right been deceived by believing that the National­
Socialist Party was in the service of the capitalists and opposed to
all forms of socialism? How many features of Hitler's system
have not been recommended to us for imitation from the most
unexpected quarters, unaware that they are an integral part of
that system and incompatible with the free society we hope to
preserve? The number of dangerous mistakes we have made
before and since the outbreak of war because we do not under­
stand the opponent with whom we are faced is appalling. It
seems almost as if we did not want to understand the develop­
ment which has produced totalitarianism because such an
understanding might destroy some of the dearest illusions to
which we are determined to cling.
We shall never be successful in our dealings with the Germans
till we understand the character and the growth of the ideas
which now govern them. The theory which is once again put
forth, that the Germans as such are inherently vicious, is hardlyINTRODUCTION 7
tenable and not very creditable to those who hold it. It dis­
honours the long series of Englishmen who during the past
hundred years have gladly taken over what was best, and not
only what was best, in German thought. It overlooks the fact that
when eighty years ago John Stuart Mill was writing his great
essay On Liberty he drew his inspiration, more than from any
other men, from two Germans, Goethe and Wilhelm von Hum­
boldt,l and forgets the fact that two of the most influential intel­
lectual forebears of National Socialism, Thomas Carlyle and
Houston Stewart Chamberlain, were a Scot and an Englishman.
In its cruder forms this view is a disgrace to those who by
maintaining it adopt the worst features of German racial theor­
ies. The problem is not why the Germans as such are vicious,
which congenitally they are probably no more than other
peoples, but to determine the circumstances which during the
last seventy years have made possible the progressive growth and
the ultimate victory of a particular set of ideas, and why in the
end this victory has brought the most vicious elements among
them to the top. Mere hatred of everything German, instead of
the particular ideas which now dominate the Germans is, more­
over, very dangerous, because it blinds those who indulge in it
against a real threat. It is to be feared that this attitude is fre­
quently merely a kind of escapism, caused by an unwillingness
to recognise tendencies which are not confined to Germany, and
by reluctance to reexamine, and if necessary to discard, beliefs
which we have taken over from the Germans and by which we
are still as much deluded as the Germans were. It is doubly
dangerous because the contention that only the peculiar wicked­
ness of the Germans has produced the Nazi system is likely to
I As some people may think this statement exaggerated, the testimony of Lord
Morley may be worth quoting, who in his Recollectionsspeaks of the "acknow­
ledged point" that the main argument of the essay On Liberty "was not original
but came from Germany".8 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
become the excuse for forcing on us the very institutions which
have produced that wickedness.
The interpretation of the developments in Germany and Italy
about to be proffered in this book is very different from that
given by most foreign observers and by the majority of exiles
from those countries. But if this interpretation is correct, it will
also explain why it -is almost impossible for a person who, like
most of the exiles and the foreign correspondents of English and
American newspapers, holds the now prevalent socialist views,
to see those events in the proper perspective.
1
The superficial and
misleading view, which sees in National-Socialism merely a reac­
tion fomented by those whose privileges or interests were
threatened by the advance of socialism, was naturally supported
by all those who, although they were at one time active in the
movement of ideas that has led to National-Socialism, have
stopped at some point of that development and, by the conflict
into which this brought them with the Nazis, were forced to
leave their country. But the fact that they were numerically the
only significant opposition to the Nazis means no more than that
in the wider sense practically all Germans had become socialists,
and that liberalism in the old sense had been driven out by
socialism. As we hope to show, the conflict in existence between
the National-Socialist "Right" and the "Left" in Germany is the
1 How thoroughly the views held in all quarters, even the most conservative, of
a whole country can be coloured by the predominant Left bias of the foreign
correspondents of its Press, is well illustrated by the views almost universally
held in America about the relations between Great Britain and India. The
Englishman who wishes to see events on the European Continent in the proper
perspective must seriously consider the possibility that his views may have
been distorted in precisely the same manner, and for the same reasons. This is
in no way meant to reflect on the sincerity of the views of American and
English foreign correspondents. But anyone who knows the kind of native
circles with which foreign correspondents are likely to have close contacts, will
have no difficulty in understanding the sources of this bias.I NTRO DUCTI 0 N 9
kind of conflict that will always arise between rival socialist fac­
tions. If this interpretation is correct it means, however, that
many of those socialist refugees, in clinging to their beliefs, are
now, though with the best will in the world, helping to lead
their adopted country the way which Germany has gone.
I know that many of my English friends have sometimes been
shocked by the semi-Fascist views they would occasionally hear
expressed by German refugees, whose genuinely socialist con­
victions could not be doubted. But while these English observers
put this down to their being Germans, the true explanation is
that they were socialists whose experience had carried them
several stages beyond that yet reached by socialists in this coun­
try. It is true, of course, that German socialists have found much
support in their country from certain features of the Prussian
tradition; and this kinship between Prussianism and socialism, in
which in Germany both sides gloried, gives additional support
to our main contention.
1
But it would be a mistake to believe
that the specific German rather than the socialist element pro­
duced totalitarianism. It was the prevalence of socialist views and
not Prussianism that Germany had in common with Italy and
Russia-and it was from the masses and not from the classes
steeped in the Prussian tradition, and favoured by it, that
National-Socialism arose.
1 That there did exist a certain kinship between socialism and the organisation
of the Prussian State. consciously organised from the top as in no other coun­
try. is undeniable and was freely recognised already by the early French social­
ists. Long before the ideal of running the whole state on the same principles as
a single factory was to inspire nineteenth-century socialism. the Prussian poet
Novalis had already deplored that "no other state has ever been administered so
much like a factory as Prussia since the death of Frederick William. U (C(
Novalis [Friedrich von Hardenberg]. Glauben und Liebe. oder der Konig und die Konigin.
1798.)1
TH E ABAN DON ED ROAD
A programme whose basic thesis is, not that the system of
free enterprise for profit has failed in this generation, but that
it has not yet been tried.
F. D. Roosevelt.
When the course of civilisation takes an unexpected turn, when
instead of the continuous progress which we have come to
expect, we find ourselves threatened by evils associated by us
with past ages of barbarism, we blame naturally anything but
ourselves. Have we not all striven according to our best lights,
and have not many of our finest minds incessantly worked to
make this a better world? Have not all our efforts and hopes been
directed towards greater freedom, justice, and prosperity? If the
outcome is so different from our aims, if, instead of freedom and
prosperity, bondage and misery stare us in the face, is it not clear
that sinister forces must have foiled our intentions, that we are
the victims of some evil power which must be conquered before
we can resume the road to better things? However much we may
differ when we name the culprit, whether it is the wickedTH E ABAN DON ED ROAD 11
capitalist or the vicious spirit of a particular nation, the stupidity
of our elders, or a social system not yet, although we have
struggled against it for half a century, fully overthrown-we all
are, or at least were until recently, certain of one thing: that the
leading ideas which during the last generation have become
common to most people of goodwill and have determined the
major changes in our social life cannot have been wrong. We are
ready to accept almost any explanation of the present crisis of
our civilisation except one: that the present state of the world
may be the result of genuine error on our own part, and that the
pursuit of some of our most cherished ideals have apparently
produced results utterly different from those which we
expected.
While all our energies are directed to bringing this war to a
victorious conclusion, it is sometimes difficult to remember that
even before the war the values for which we are now fighting
were threatened here and destroyed elsewhere. Though for the
time being the different ideals are represented by hostile nations
fighting for their existence, we must not forget that this conflict
has grown out of a struggle of ideas within what, not so long
ago, was a common European civilisation; and that the tenden­
cies which have culminated in the creation of the totalitarian
systems were not confined to the countries which have suc­
cumbed to them. Though the first task must now be to win the
war, to win it will only gain us another opportunity to face the
basic problems and to find a way of averting the fate which has
overtaken kindred civilisations.
Now, it is somewhat difficult to think of Germany and Italy, or
of Russia, not as different worlds, but as products of a develop­
ment of thought in which we have shared; it is, at least so far as
our enemies are concerned, easier and more comforting to think
that they are entirely different from us and that what happened
there cannot happen here. Yet the history of these countries in
the years before the rise of the totalitarian system showed few12 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
features with which we are not familiar. The external conflict is a
result of a transformation of European thought in which others
have moved so much faster as to bring them into irreconcilable
conflict with our ideals, but which has not left us unaffected.
That a change of ideas, and the force of human will, have
made the world what it is now, though men did not foresee the
results, and that no spontaneous change in the facts obliged us
thus to adapt our thought, is perhaps particularly difficult for the
English to see, just because in this development the English have,
fortunately for them, lagged behind most of the European
peoples. We still think of the ideals which guide us and have
guided us for the past generation, as ideals only to be realised in
the future, and are not aware how far in the last twenty-five years
they have already transformed, not only the world, but also this
country. We still believe that until quite recently we were gov­
erned by what are vaguely called nineteenth -century ideas or the
principle of laissez-faire.Compared with some other countries,
and from the point of view of those impatient to speed up the
change, there may be some justification for such belief. But
although till 193 1 this country had followed only slowly on the
path on which others had led, even by then we had moved so far
that only those whose memory goes back to the years before the
last war know what a liberal world has been like.
1
The crucial point of which people here are still so little aware
is, however, not merely the magnitude of the changes which
1 Even in that year the Macmillan Report could speak already of "the change of
outlook of the government of this country in recent times, its growing pre­
occupation, irrespective of party, with the management of the life of the
people" and add that "Parliament finds itself increasingly engaged in legisla­
tion which has for its conscious aim the regulation of the day-to-day affairs of
the community and now intervenes in matters formerly thought to be entirely
outside its scope". This could be said before, later in the same year, the country
finally took the headlong plunge and, in the short space of the inglorious years
193 1 to 193 9, transformed its economic system beyond recognition.THE ABANDONED ROAD 13
have taken place during the last generation, but the fact that they
mean a complete change in the direction of the evolution of our
ideas and social order. For at least twenty-five years before the
spectre of totalitarianism became a real threat, we had progres­
sively been moving away from the basic ideas on which Euro­
pean civilisation has been built. That this movement on which
we have entered with such high hopes and ambitions should
have brought us face to face with the totalitarian horror has
come as a profound shock to this generation, which still refuses
to connect the two facts. Yet this development merely confirms
the warnings of the fathers of the liberal philosophy which we
still profess. We have progressively abandoned that freedom in
economic affairs without which personal and political freedom
has never existed in the past. Although we had been warned by
some of the greatest political thinkers of the nineteenth century,
by de Tocqueville and Lord Acton, that socialism means slavery,
we have steadily moved in the direction of socialism. And now
that we have seen a new form of slavery arise before our eyes, we
have so completely forgotten the warning, that it scarcely occurs
to us that the two things may be connected. 1
How sharp a break not only with the recent past but with the
whole evolution of Western civilisation the modern trend
towards socialism means, becomes clear if we consider it not
merely against the background of the nineteenth century, but in
a longer historical perspective. We are rapidly abandoning not
the views merely of Cobden and Bright, of Adam Smith and
Hume, or even of Locke and Milton, but one of the salient
I Even much more recent warnings which have proved dreadfully true have
been almost entirely forgotten. It is not yet thirty years since Mr. Hilaire Belloc,
in a book which explains more of what has happened since in Germany than
most works written after the event, explained that "the effect of Socialist doc­
trine on Capitalist society is to produce a third thing different from either of its
two begetters-to wit, the Servile State" (The Servile State, 191 3, 3rd ed. 1927,
p. xiv).14 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
characteristics of Western civilisation as it has grown from the
foundations laid by Christianity and the Greeks and Romans.
Not merely nineteenth- and eighteenth-century liberalism, but
the basic individualism inherited by us from Erasmus and
Montaigne, from Cicero and Tacitus, Pericles and Thucydides is
progressively relinquished.
The Nazi leader who described the National-Socialist revolu­
tion as a counter-Renaissance spoke more truly than he probably
knew. It was the decisive step in the destruction of that civilisa­
tion which modern man had built up from the age of the
Renaissance and which was above all an individualist civilisation.
Individualism has a bad name to-day and the term has come to
be connected with egotism and selfishness. But the individual­
ism of which we speak in contrast to socialism and all other
forms of collectivism has no necessary connection with these.
Only gradually in the course of this book shall we be able to
make clear the contrast between the two opposing principles.
But the essential features of that individualism which, from
elements provided by Christianity and the philosophy of clas­
sical antiquity, was first fully developed during the Renaissance
and has since grown and spread into what we know as Western
European civilisation-the respect for the individual man qua
man, that is the recognition of his own views and tastes as
supreme in his own sphere, however narrowly that may be cir­
cumscribed, and the belief that it is desirable that men should
develop their own individual gifts and bents. "Freedom" and
"liberty" are now words so worn with use and abuse that one
must hesitate to employ them to express the ideals for which
they stood during that period. Tolerance is, perhaps, the only
word which still preserves the full meaning of the principle
which during the whole of this period was in the ascendant
and which only in recent times has again been in decline, to
disappear completely with the rise of the totalitarian state.
The gradual transformation of a rigidly organised hierarchicTHE ABANDONED ROAD 15
system into one where men could at least attempt to shape their
own life, where man gained the opportunity of knowing and
choosing between different forms of life, is closely associated
with the growth of commerce. From the commercial cities of
Northern Italy the new view of life spread with commerce to the
west and north, through France and the south-west of Germany
to the Low Countries and the British Isles, taking firm root
wherever there was no despotic political power to stifle it. In the
Low Countries and Britain it for a long time enjoyed its fullest
development and for the first time had an opportunity to grow
freely and to become the foundation of the social and political
life of these countries. And it was from there that in the late
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries it again began to spread in
a more fully developed form to the West and East, to the New
World and the centre of the European continent where devastat­
ing wars and political oppression had largely submerged the
earlier beginnings of a similar growth.
1
During the whole of this modern period of European history
the general direction of social development was one of freeing
the individual from the ties which had bound him to the
customary or prescribed ways in the pursuit of his ordinary
activities. The conscious realisation that the spontaneous and
uncontrolled efforts of individuals were capable of producing a
complex order of economic activities could come only after this
development had made some progress. The subsequent elabor­
ation of a consistent argument in favour of economic freedom
was the outcome of a free growth of economic activity which
had been the undesigned and unforeseen by-product of political
freedom.
Perhaps the greatest result of the unchaining of individual
1 The most fateful of these developments, pregnant with consequences not yet
extinct, was the subjection and partial destruction of the German bourgeoisie
by the territorial princes in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.16 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
energies was the marvellous growth of science which followed
the march of individual liberty from Italy to England and
beyond. That the inventive faculty of man had been no less in
earlier periods is shown by the many highly ingenious auto­
matic toys and other mechanical contrivances constructed
while industrial technique still remained stationary, and by the
development in some industries which, like mining or watch­
making, were not subject to restrictive controls. But the few
attempts towards a more extended industrial use of mechanical
inventions, some extraordinarily advanced, were promptly sup­
pressed, and the desire for knowledge was stifled, so long as the
dominant views were held to be binding for all: the beliefs of the
great majority on what was right and proper were allowed to bar
the way of the individual innovator. Only since industrial free­
dom opened the path to the free use of new knowledge, only ,
since everything could be tried-if somebody could be found to
back it at his own risk-and, it should be added, as often as not
from outside the authorities officially entrusted with the cultiva­
tion of learning, has science made the great strides which in the
last hundred and fifty years have changed the face of the world.
As is so often true, the nature of our civilisation has been seen
more clearly by its enemies than by most of its friends: "the
perennial Western malady, the revolt of the individual against
the species", as that nineteenth-century totalitarian, Auguste
Comte, has described it, was indeed the force which built our
civilisation. What the nineteenth century added to the indi­
vidualism of the preceding period was merely to make all classes
conscious of freedom, to develop systematically and continu­
ously what had grown in a haphazard and patchy manner and to
spread it from England and Holland over most of the European
Continent.
The result of this growth surpassed all expectations. Wherever
the barriers to the free exercise of human ingenuity were
removed man became rapidly able to satisfy ever-wideningTH E ABAN DON ED ROAD 17
ranges of desire. And while the rising standard soon led to the
discovery of very dark spots in society, spots which men were no
longer willing to tolerate, there was probably no class that did
not substantially benefit from the general advance. We cannot do
justice to this astonishing growth if we measure it by our present
standards, which themselves result from this growth and now
make many defects obvious. To appreciate what it meant to those
who took part in it we must measure it by the hopes and wishes
men held when it began: and there can be no doubt that its
success surpassed man's wildest dreams, that by the beginning
of the twentieth century the working man in the Western world
had reached a degree of material comfort, security, and personal
independence which a hundred years before had seemed
scarcely possible.
What in the future will probably appear the most significant
and far-reaching effect of this success is the new sense of power
over their own fate, the belief in the unbounded possibilities of
improving their own lot, which the success already achieved
created among men. With the success grew ambition-and man
had every right to be ambitious. What had been an inspiring
promise seemed no longer enough, the rate of progress far too
slow; and the principles which had made this progress possible
in the past came to be regarded more as obstacles to speedier
progress, impatiently to be brushed away, than as the conditions
for the preservation and development of what had already been
achieved.
* * * * *
There is nothing in the basic principles of liberalism to make it a
stationary creed, there are no hard-and-fast rules fixed once and
for all. The fundamental principle that in the ordering of our
affairs we should make as much use as possible of the spon­
taneous forces of society, and resort as little as possible to
coercion, is capable of an infinite variety of applications. There18 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
is, in particular, all the difference between deliberately creating a
system within which competition will work as beneficially as
possible, and passively accepting institutions as they are. Prob­
ably nothing has done so much harm to the liberal cause as the
wooden insistence of some liberals on certain rough rules of
thumb, above all the principle of laissez-faire.Yet in a sense this
was necessary and unavoidable. Against the innumerable inter­
ests who could show that particular measures would confer
immediate and obvious benefits on some, while the harm they
caused was much more indirect and difficult to see, nothing
short of some hard-and-fast rule would have been effective. And
since a strong presumption in favour of industrial liberty had un­
doubtedly been established, the temptation to present it as a rule
which knew no exceptions was too strong always to be resisted.
But with this attitude taken by many popularisers of the lib­
eral doctrine, it was almost inevitable that, once their position
was penetrated at some points, it should soon collapse as a
whole. The position was further weakened by the inevitably slow
progress of a policy which aimed at a gradual improvement of
the institutional framework of a free society. This progress
depended on the growth of our understanding of the social
forces and the conditions most favourable to their working in a
desirable manner. Since the task was to assist, and where
necessary to supplement, their operation, the first requisite was
to understand them. The attitude of the liberal towards society is
like that of the gardener who tends a plant and in order to create
the conditions most favourable to its growth must know as much
as possible about its structure and the way it functions.
No sensible person should have doubted that the crude rules
in which the principles of economic policy of the nineteenth
century were expressed were only a beginning, that we had yet
much to learn, and that there were still immense possibilities of
advancement on the lines on which we had moved. But this
advance could only come as we gained increasing intellectualTHE ABANDONED ROAD 19
mastery of the forces of which we had to make use. There were
many obvious tasks, such as our handling of the monetary sys­
tem, and the prevention or control of monopoly, and an even
greater number of less obvious but hardly less important tasks to
be undertaken in other fields, where there could be no doubt
that the governments possessed enormous powers for good and
evil; and there was every reason to expect that with a better
understanding of the problems we should some day be able to
use these powers successfully.
But while the progress towards what is commonly called
"positive" action was necessarily slow, and while for the
immediate improvement liberalism had to rely largely on the
gradual increase of wealth which freedom brought about, it had
constantly to fight proposals which threatened this progress. It
came to be regarded as a "negative" creed because it could offer
to particular individuals little more than a share in the common
progress-a progress which came to be taken more and more
for granted and was no longer recognised as the result of the
policy of freedom. It might even be said that the very success of
liberalism became the cause of its decline. Because of the success
already achieved man became increasingly unwilling to tolerate
the evils still with him which now appeared both unbearable
and unnecessary.
* * * * *
Because of the growing impatience with the slow advance of
liberal policy, the just irritation with those who used liberal
phraseology in defence of anti-social privileges, and the bound­
less ambition seemingly justified by the material improvements
already achieved, it came to pass that toward the turn of the
century the belief in the basic tenets of liberalism was more and
more relinquished. What had been achieved came to be
regarded as a secure and imperishable possession, acquired once
and for all. The eyes of the people became fixed on the new20 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
demands, the rapid satisfaction of which seemed to be barred by
the adherence to the old principles. It became more and more
widely accepted that further advance could not be expected
along the old lines within the general framework which had
made past progress pOSSible,but only by a complete remodelling
of society. It was no longer a question of adding to or improving
the existing machinery, but of completely scrapping and
replaCing it. And as the hope of the new generation came to be
centred on something completely new, interest in, and under­
standing of, the functioning of the existing society rapidly
declined; and with the decline of the understanding of the way
in which the free system worked our awareness of what
depended on its existence also decreased.
This is not the place to discuss how this change in outlook
was fostered by the uncritical transfer to the problems of society
of habits of thought engendered by the preoccupation with
technological problems, the habits of thought of the natural
scientist and the engineer, how these at the same time tended to
discredit the results of the past study of society which did not
conform to their prejudices, and to impose ideals of organisa­
tion on a sphere to which they are not appropriate. 1 All we are
here concerned to show is how completely, though gradually
and by almost imperceptible steps, our attitude towards society
has changed. What at every stage of this process of change had
appeared a difference of degree only, has in its cumulative effect
already brought about a fundamental difference between the
older liberal attitude towards society and the present approach to
social problems. The change amounts to a complete reversal
of the trend we have sketched, an entire abandonment of the
individualist tradition which has created Western civilisation.
1 The author has made an attempt to trace the beginning of this development in
two series of articles on "Scientism and the Study of Society" and "The
Counter-Revolution of Science" which appeared in Economica, 1941-4.THE ABANDONED ROAD 21
According to the views now dominant the question is no
longer how we can make the best use of the spontaneous forces
found in a free society. We have in effect undertaken to dispense
with the forces which produced unforeseen results and to
replace the impersonal and anonymous mechanism of the mar­
ket by collective and "conscious" direction of all social forces to
deliberately chosen goals. The difference cannot be better illus­
trated than by the extreme position taken in a widely acclaimed
book on whose programme of so-called "planning for freedom"
we shall have to comment yet more than once.
We have never had to set up and direct [writes Dr. Karl
Mannheim] the entire system of nature as we are forced to do
to-day with society.... Mankind is tending more and more to
regulate the whole of its social life, although it has never
attempted to create a second nature.
1
* * * * *
It is significant that this change in the trend of ideas has
coincided with a reversal of the direction in which ideas have
travelled in space. For over two hundred years English ideas had
been spreading eastwards. The rule of freedom which had been
achieved in England seemed destined to spread throughout the
world. By about 1870 the reign of these ideas had probably
reached its easternmost expansion. From then onwards it began
to retreat and a different set of ideas, not really new but very old,
began to advance from the East. England lost her intellectual
leadership in the political and social sphere and became an
importer of ideas. For the next sixty years Germany became the
centre from which the ideas destined to govern the world in the
twentieth century spread east and west. Whether it was Hegel or
Marx, List or Schmoller, Sombart or Mannheim, whether it was
I Man and Societyin an Age of Reconstruction,1940, p. 175.22 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
socialism in its more radical form or merely "organisation" or
"planning" of a less radical kind, German ideas were everywhere
readily imported and German institutions imitated. Although
most of the new ideas, and particularly socialism, did not origin­
ate in Germany, it was in Germany that they were perfected and
during the last quarter of the nineteenth and the first quarter of
the twentieth century they reached their fullest development. It
is now often forgotten how very considerable was the lead
which Germany had during this period in the development of
the theory and practice of socialism, that a generation before
socialism became a serious issue in this country, Germany had a
large socialist party in her parliament, and that till not very long
ago the doctrinal development of socialism was almost entirely
carried on in Germany and Austria, so that even to-day Russian
discussion largely carries on where the Germans left off; most
English socialists are still unaware that the majority of the
problems they begin to discover were thoroughly discussed by
German socialists long ago.
The intellectual influence which German thinkers were able
to exercise during this period on the whole world was sup­
ported not merely by the great mat'erial progress of Germany
but even more by the extraordinary reputation which German
thinkers and scientists had earned during the preceding hun­
dred years when Germany had once more become an integral
and even leading member of the common European civilisa­
tion. But it soon served to assist the spreading from Germany
of ideas directed against the foundations of that civilisation.
The Germans themselves-or at least those among them who
spread these ideas-were fully aware of the conflict: what had
been the common heritage of European civilisation became to
them, long before the Nazis, "Western" civilisation-where
"Western" was no longer used in the old sense of Occident
but had come to mean west of the Rhine. "Western" in this
sense was Liberalism and Democracy, Capitalism and Individu-THE ABANDONED ROAD 23
alism, Free Trade and any form of Internationalism or love of
peace.
But in spite of the ill-concealed contempt of an ever­
increasing number of Germans for those "shallow" Western
ideals, or perhaps because of it, the people of the West continued
to import German ideas and were even induced to believe that
their own former convictions had merely been rationalisations
of selfish interests, that Free Trade was a doctrine invented to
further British interests, and that the political ideals England had
given to the world were hopelessly outmoded and a thing to be
ashamed of.2
THE GREAT UTOPIA
What has always made the state a hell on earth has been
preciselythat man has tried to make it his heaven.
F. Hoelderlin.
That socialism has displaced liberalism as the doctrine held by
the great majority of progressives does not simply mean that
people had forgotten the warnings of the great liberal thinkers of
the past about the consequences of collectivism. It has happened
because they were persuaded of the very opposite of what these
men had predicted. The extraordinary thing is that the same
socialism that was not only early recognised as the gravest threat
to freedom, but quite openly began as a reaction against the
liberalism of the French Revolution, gained general acceptance
under the flag of liberty. It is rarely remembered now that social­
ism in its beginnings was frankly authoritarian. The French
writers who laid the foundations of modern socialism had no
doubt that their ideas could be put into practice only by a strong
dictatorial government. To them socialism meant an attempt to
"terminate the revolution" by a deliberate reorganisation ofTH E GREAT UTOPIA 25
society on hierarchical lines, and the imposition of a coercive
"spiritual power". Where freedom was concerned, the founders
of socialism made no bones about their intentions. Freedom of
thought they regarded as the root-evil of nineteenth-century
society, and the first of modern planners, Saint-Simon, even pre­
dicted that those who did not obey his proposed planning
boards would be "treated as cattle".
Only under the influence of the strong democratic currents
preceding the revolution of 1848 did socialism begin to ally
itself with the forces of freedom. But it took the new "demo­
cratic socialism" a long time to live down the suspicions aroused
by its antecedents. Nobody saw more clearly than de Tocqueville
that democracy as an essentially individualist institution stood in
an irreconcilable conflict with socialism:
Democracy extends the sphere of individual freedom [he said
in 1848], socialism restricts it. Democracy attaches all possible
value to each man; socialism makes each man a mere agent, a
mere number. Democracy and socialism have nothing in
common but one word: equality. But notice the difference:
while democracy seeks equality in liberty, socialism seeks
equality in restraint and servitude.'
To allay these suspicions and to harness to its cart the strongest
of all political motives, the craving for freedom, socialism began
increasingly to make use of the promise of a "new freedom".
The coming of socialism was to be the leap from the realm of
necessity to the realm of freedom. It was to bring "economic
freedom", without which the political freedom already gained
was "not worth having". Only socialism was capable of effecting
I "Discours prononce aI'assemblee constituante Ie 12 Septembre 1848 sur Ia
question du droit au travail." CEuvres completes d'Alexis de Tocquevi11~ vol. IX, 1866,
p.546.26 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
the consummation of the agelong struggle for freedom in which
the attainment of political freedom was but a first step.
The subtle change in meaning to which the word freedom
was subjected in order that this argument should sound plaus­
ible is important. To the great apostles of political freedom the
word had meant freedom from coercion, freedom from the arbi­
trary power of other men, release from the ties which left the
individual no choice but obedience to the orders of a superior to
whom he was attached. The new freedom promised, however,
was to be freedom from necessity, release from the compulsion
of the circumstances which inevitably limit the range of choice
of all of us, although for some very much more than for others.
Before man could be truly free, the "despotism of physical
want" had to be broken, the "restraints of the economic system"
relaxed.
Freedom in this sense is, of course, merely another name for
power! or wealth. Yet, although the promises of this new free­
dom were often coupled with irresponsible promises of a great
increase in material wealth in a socialist society, it was not from
such an absolute conquest of the niggardliness of nature that
economic freedom was expected. What the promise really
amounted to was that the great existing disparities in the range
of choice of different people were to disappear. The demand for
the new freedom was thus only another name for the old
1 The characteristic confusion of freedom with power, which we shall meet
again and again throughout this discussion, is too big a subject to be thor­
oughly examined here. As old as socialism itself, it is so closely allied with it
that almost seventy years ago a French scholar, discussing its Saint-Simonian
origins, was led to say that this theory of liberty" est aelle seule tout Ie social­
isme" CPo Janet, Saint-Simon et Ie Saint-Simonisme,1878, p. 26, note). The most
explicit defender of this confusion is, significantly, the leading philosopher of
American left-wingism, John Dewey, according to whom "liberty is the effect­
ive power to do specific things" so that "the demand for liberty is demand for
power" ("Liberty and Social Control", The SocialFrontier,November 193 5, p. 41).THE GREAT UTOPIA 27
demand for an equal distribution of wealth. But the new name
gave the socialists another word in common with the liberals
and they exploited it to the full. And although the word was used
in a different sense by the two groups, few people noticed this
and still fewer asked themselves whether the two kinds of
freedom promised really could be combined.
There can be no doubt that the promise of greater freedom
has become one of the most effective weapons of socialist
propaganda and that the belief that socialism would bring free­
dom is genuine and sincere. But this would only heighten the
tragedy if it should prove that what was promised to us as the
Road to Freedom was in fact the High Road to Servitude.
Unquestionably the promise of more freedom was responsible
for luring more and more liberals along the socialist road, for
blinding them to the conflict which exists between the basic
principles of socialism and liberalism, and for often enabling
socialists to usurp the very name of the old party of freedom.
Socialism was embraced by the greater part of the intelligentsia
as the apparent heir of the liberal tradition: therefore it is not
surprising that to them the idea should appear inconceivable of
socialism leading to the opposite of liberty.
* * * * *
In recent years, however, the old apprehensions of the
unforeseen consequences of socialism have once more been
strongly voiced from the most unexpected quarters. Observer
after observer, in spite of the contrary expectation with which he
approached his subject, has been impressed with the extraordin­
ary similarity in many respects of the conditions under "fas­
cism" and "communism". While "progressives" in this country
and elsewhere were still deluding themselves that communism
and fascism represented opposite poles, more and more people
began to ask themselves whether these new tyrannies were not
the outcome of the same tendencies. Even communists must28 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
have been somewhat shaken by such testimonies as that of Mr.
Max Eastman, Lenin's old friend, who found himself compelled
to admit that "instead of being better, Stalinism is worse than
fascism, more ruthless, barbarous, unjust, immoral, anti­
democratic, unredeemed by any hope or scruple", and that it is
"better described as superfascist"; and when we find the same
author recognising that "Stalinism is socialism, in the sense of
being an inevitable although unforeseen political accompani­
ment of the nationalisation and collectivisation which he had
relied upon as part of his plan for erecting a classless society", 1
his conclusion clearly achieves wider significance.
Mr. Eastman's case is perhaps the most remarkable, yet he is by
no means the first or the only sympathetic observer of the Rus­
sian experiment to form similar conclusions. Several years earlier
Mr. W H. Chamberlin, who in twelve years in Russia as an Amer­
ican correspondent had seen all his ideals shattered, summed up
the conclusions of his studies there and in Germany and Italy in
the statement that "Socialism is certain to prove, in the begin­
ning at least, the road NOT to freedom, but to dictatorship and
counter-dictatorships, to civil war of the fiercest kind. Socialism
achieved and maintained by democratic means seems definitely
to belong to the world of utopias."2 Similarly a British writer, Mr.
F. A. Voigt, after many years of close observation of develop­
ments in Europe as a foreign correspondent, concludes that
"Marxism has led to Fascism and National-Socialism, because, in
all essentials, it is Fascism and National Socialism".3 And Dr.
Walter Lippmann has arrived at the conviction that
the generation to which we belong is now learning from experi­
ence what happens when men retreat from freedom to a
I Max Eastman, Stalin'sRussia and the Crisis of Socialism, 1940, p. 82.
2 W H. Chamberlin, A False Utopia, 1937, pp. 202-3.
3 F. A. Voigt, Unto Ccesar, 1939, p. 95.THE GREAT UTOPIA 29
coercive organisation of their affairs. Though they promise
themselves a more abundant life, they must in practice renounce
it; as the organised direction increases, the variety of ends
must give way to uniformity. That is the nemesis of the planned
society and the authoritarian principle in human affairs.
1
Many more similar statements from people in a position to
judge might be selected from publications of recent years, par­
ticularly from those by men who as citizens of the now totalitar­
ian countries have lived through the transformation and have
been forced by their experience to revise many cherished beliefs.
We shall quote as one more example a German writer who
expresses the same conclusion perhaps more justly than those
already quoted.
The complete collapse of the belief in the attainability of
freedom and equality through Marxism [writes Mr. Peter
Drucker
2
] has forced Russia to travel the same road towards a
totalitarian, purely negative, non-economic society of
unfreedom and inequality which Germany has been following.
Not that communism and fascism are essentially the same.
Fascism is the stage reached after communism has proved an
illusion, and it has proved as much an illusion in Stalinist
Russia as in pre-Hitler Germany.
No less significant is the intellectual history of many of the
Nazi and Fascist leaders. Everybody who has watched the growth
of these movements in Italy3 or Germany has been struck by the
1 AtlanticMonthly, November 1936, p. 552.
2 The End of EconomicMan, 1939, p. 230.
3 An illuminating account of the intellectual history of many of the Fascist
leaders will be found in R. Michels (himself an ex-Marxist Fascist), Sozialismus
und Faszismus,Munich 1925, vol. II, pp. 264-6, and 3 11-1 2.30 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
number of leading men, from Mussolini downwards (and not
excluding Laval and Quisling), who began as socialists and
ended as Fascists or Nazis. And what is true of the leaders is even
more true of the rank and file of the movement. The relative ease
with which a young communist could be converted into a Nazi
or vice versa was generally known in Germany, best of all to the
propagandists of the two parties. Many a University teacher in
this country during the 1930s has seen English and American
students return from the Continent, uncertain whether they
were communists or Nazis and certain only that they hated
Western liberal civilisation.
It is true, of course, that in Germany before 1933 and in Italy
before 1922 communists and Nazis or Fascists clashed more
frequently with each other than with other parties. They com­
peted for the support of the same type of mind and reserved for
each other the hatred of the heretic. But their practice showed
how closely they are related. To both, the real enemy, the man
with whom they had nothing in common and whom they could
not hope to convince, is the liberal of the old type. While to the
Nazi the communist, and to the communist the Nazi, and to
both the socialist, are potential recruits who are made of the
right timber, although they have listened to false prophets, they
both know that there can be no compromise between them and
those who really believe in individual freedom.
Lest this be doubted by people misled by official propaganda
from either side, let me quote one more statement from an
authority that ought not to be suspect. In an article under the
significant title of "The Rediscovery of Liberalism", Professor
Eduard Heimann, one of the leaders of German religious
socialism, writes:
Hitlerism proclaims itself as both true democracy and true
socialism, and the terrible truth is that there is a grain of truth
for such claims-an infinitesimal grain, to be sure, but at anyTHE GREAT UTOPIA 31
rate enough to serve as a basis for such fantastic distortions.
Hitlerism even goes so far as to claim the role of protector of
Christianity, and the terrible truth is that even this gross mis­
interpretation is able to make some impression. But one fact
stands out with perfect clarity in all the fog: Hitler has never
claimed to represent true liberalism. Liberalism then has the
distinction of being the doctrine most hated by Hitler.'
It should be added that this hatred had little occasion to show
itself in practice merely because, by the time Hitler came to
power, liberalism was to all intents and purposes dead in
Germany. And it was socialism that had killed it.
* * * * *
While to many who have watched the transition from socialism
to fascism at close quarters the connection between the two
systems has become increasingly obvious, in this country the
majority of people still believe that socialism and freedom can be
combined. There can be no doubt that most socialists here still
believe profoundly in the liberal ideal of freedom, and that they
would recoil if they became convinced that the realisation of
their programme would mean the destruction of freedom. So
little is the problem yet seen, so easily do the most irreconcilable
ideals still live together, that we can still hear such contradictions
in terms as "individualist socialism" seriously discussed. If this is
the state of mind which makes us drift into a new world, noth­
ing can be more urgent than that we should seriously examine
the real significance of the evolution that has taken place
I Social Research (New York), vol. VIII, no. 4, November 1941.-It deserves to be
recalled in this connection that, whatever may have been his reasons, Hitler
thought it expedient to declare in one of his public speeches as late as February
1941 that "basically National Socialism and Marxism are the same" (Cf The
Bulletin of International News published by the Royal Institute of International
Affairs, vol. XVIII, no. 5, p. 269.)32 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
elsewhere. Although our conclusions will only confirm the
apprehensions which others have already expressed, the reasons
why this development cannot be regarded as accidental will not
appear without a rather full examination of the main aspects of
this transformation of social life. That democratic socialism, the
great utopia of the last few generations, is not only unachievable,
but that to strive for it produces something so utterly different
that few of those who now wish it would be prepared to accept
the consequences, many will not believe till the connection has
been laid bare in all its aspects.3
IN DIVI DUALISM AN D
COLLECTIVISM
The socialists believe in two things which are absolutely
different and perhaps even contradictory: freedom and
organisation.
Elie Halevy.
Before we can progress with our main problem, an obstacle has
yet to be surmounted. A confusion largely responsible for the
way in which we are drifting into things which nobody wants
must be cleared up.
This confusion concerns nothing less than the concept of
socialism itself It may mean, and is often used to describe,
merely the ideals of social justice, greater equality and security
which are the ultimate aims of socialism. But it means also the
particular method by which most socialists hope to attain these
ends and which many competent people regard as the only
methods by which they can be fully and quickly attained. In this
sense socialism means the abolition of private enterprise, of34 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
private ownership of the means of production, and the creation
of a system of "planned economy" in which the entrepreneur
working for profit is replaced by a central planning body.
There are many people who call themselves socialists
although they care only about the first, who fervently believe in
those ultimate aims of socialism but neither care nor understand
how they can be achieved, and who are merely certain that they
must be achieved, whatever the cost. But to nearly all those to
whom socialism is not merely a hope but an object of practical
politics, the characteristic methods of modern socialism are as
essential as the ends themselves. Many people, on the other
hand, who value the ultimate ends of socialism no less than the
socialists, refuse to support socialism because of the dangers to
other values they see in the methods proposed by the socialists.
The dispute about socialism has thus become largely a dispute
about means and not about ends-although the question
whether the different ends of socialism can be simultaneously
achieved is also involved.
This would be enough to create confusion. And the confusion
has been further increased by the common practice of denying
that those who repudiate the means value the ends. But this is
not all. The situation is still more complicated by the fact that the
same means, the "economic planning" which is the prime
instrument of socialist reform, can be used for many other pur­
poses. We must centrally direct economic activity if we want to
make the distribution of income conform to current ideas of
social justice. "Planning", therefore, is wanted by all those
who demand that "production for use" be substituted for pro­
duction for profit. But such planning is no less indispensable if
the distribution of incomes is to be regulated in a way which
to us appears to be the opposite of just. Whether we should
wish that more of the good things of this world should go to
some racial elite, the Nordic men, or the members of a party
or an aristocracy, the methods which we shall have to employINDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM 35
are the same as those which could ensure an equalitarian
distribution.
It may, perhaps, seem unfair to use the term socialism to
describe its methods rather than its aims, to use for a particular
method a term which for many people stands for an ultimate
ideal. It is probably preferable to describe the methods which
can be used for a great variety of ends as collectivism and to
regard socialism as a species of that genus. Yet, although to most
socialists only one species of collectivism will represent true
socialism, it must always be remembered that socialism is a spe­
cies of collectivism and that therefore everything which is true
of collectivism as such must apply also to socialism. Nearly all
the points which are disputed between socialists and liberals
concern the methods common to all forms of collectivism and
not the particular ends for which socialists want to use them;
and all the consequences with which we shall be concerned in
this book follow from the methods of collectivism irrespective
of the ends for which they are used. It must also not be forgotten
that socialism is not only by far the most important species of
collectivism or "planning"; but that it is socialism which has
persuaded liberal-minded people to submit once more to that
regimentation of economic life which they had overthrown
because, in the words of Adam Smith, it puts governments in a
position where "to support themselves they are obliged to be
oppressive and tyrannical". 1
* * * * *
The difficulties caused by the ambiguities of the common
political terms are not yet over if we agree to use the term
collectivism so as to include all types of "planned economy",
whatever the end of planning. The meaning of this term becomes
1 Quoted in Dugald Stewart's Memoirof Adam Smith from a memorandum written
by Smith in 175536 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
somewhat more definite if we make it clear that we mean that
sort of planning which is necessary to realise any given distribu­
tive ideals. But as the idea of central economic planning owes its
appeal largely to this very vagueness of its meaning, it is essential
that we should agree on its precise sense before we discuss its
consequences.
"Planning" owes its popularity largely to the fact that every­
body desires, of course, that we should handle our common
problems as rationally as possible, and that in so doing we
should use as much foresight as we can command. In this sense
everybody who is not a complete fatalist is a planner, every polit­
ical act is (or ought to be) an act of planning, and there can be
differences only between good and bad, between wise and fore­
sighted and foolish and short-sighted planning. An economist,
whose whole task is the study of how men actually do and how
they might plan their affairs, is the last person who could object
to planning in this general sense. But it is not in this sense that
our enthusiasts for a planned society now employ this term, nor
merely in this sense that we must plan if we want the distribu­
tion of income or wealth to conform to some particular stand­
ard. According to the modern planners, and for their purposes, it
is not sufficient to deSign the most rational permanent frame­
work within which the various activities would be conducted by
different persons according to their individual plans. This liberal
plan, according to them, is no plan-and it is indeed not a plan
designed to satisfy particular views about who should have what.
What our planners demand is a central direction of all economic
activity according to a single plan, laying down how the
resources of society should be "consciously directed" to serve
particular ends in a definite way.
The dispute between the modern planners and their
opponents is, therefore, not a dispute on whether we ought to
choose intelligently between the various possible organisations
of society; it is not a dispute on whether we ought to employINDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM 37
foresight and systematic thinking in planning our common
affairs. It is a dispute about what is the best way of so dOing. The
question is whether for this purpose it is better that the holder of
coercive power should confine himself in general to creating
conditions under which the knowledge and initiative of indi­
viduals is given the best scope so that they can plan most success­
fully; or whether a rational utilisation of our resources requires
central direction and organisation of all our activities according to
some consciously constructed "blueprint
H
• The socialists of all
parties have appropriated the term planning for planning of the
latter type and it is now generally accepted in this sense. But
though this is meant to suggest that this is the only rational way
of handling our affairs, it does not of course prove this. It remains
the point on which the planners and the liberals disagree.
* * * * *
It is important not to confuse opposition against this kind of
planning with a dogmatic laissez-faireattitude. The liberal argu­
ment is in favour of making the best possible use of the forces of
competition as a means of co-ordinating human efforts, not an
argument for leaving things just as they are. It is based on the
conviction that where effective competition can be created, it is a
better way of guiding individual efforts than any other. It does
not deny, but even emphasises, that, in order that competition
should work beneficially, a carefully thought-out legal frame­
work is required, and that neither the existing nor the past legal
rules are free from grave defects. Nor does it deny that where it is
impossible to create the conditions necessary to make competi­
tion effective, we must resort to other methods of guiding
economic activity. Economic liberalism is opposed, however,
to competition being supplanted by inferior methods of co­
ordinating individual efforts. And it regards competition as
superior not only because it is in most circumstances the most
efficient method known, but even more because it is the only38 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
method by which our activities can be adjusted to each other
without coercive or arbitrary intervention of authority. Indeed,
one of the main arguments in favour of competition is that it
dispenses with the need for "conscious social control" and that
it gives the individuals a chance to decide whether the prospects
of a particular occupation are sufficient to compensate for the
disadvantages and risks connected with it.
The successful use of competition as the principle of social
organisation precludes certain types of coercive interference
with economic life, but it admits of others which sometimes
may very considerably assist its work and even requires certain
kinds of government action. But there is good reason why the
negative requirements, the points where coercion must not be
used, have been particularly stressed. It is necessary in the first
instance that the parties in the market should be free to sell and
buy at any price at which they can find a partner to the transac­
tion, and that anybody should be free to produce, sell, and buy
anything that may be produced or sold at all. And it is essential
that the entry into the different trades should be open to all on
equal terms, and that the law should not tolerate any attempts by
individuals or groups to restrict this entry by open or concealed
force. Any attempt to control prices or quantities of particular
commodities deprives competition of its power of bringing
about an effective co-ordination of individual efforts, because
price changes then cease to register all the relevant changes in
circumstances and no longer provide a reliable guide for the
individual's actions.
This is not necessarily true, however, of measures merely
restricting the allowed methods of production, so long as these
restrictions affect all potential producers equally and are not used
as an indirect way of controlling prices and quantities. Though all
such controls of the methods or production impose extra costs,
Le. make it necessary to use more resources to produce a given
output, they may be well worth while. To prohibit the use ofINDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM 39
certain poisonous substances, or to require special precautions in
their use, to limit working hours or to require certain sanitary
arrangements, is fully compatible with the preservation of com­
petition. The only question here is whether in the particular
instance the advantages gained are greater than the social costs
which they impose. Nor is the preservation of competition
incompatible with an extensive system of social services-so
long as the organisation of these services is not designed in such
a way as to make competition ineffective over wide fields.
It is regrettable, though not difficult to explain, that much less
attention than to these negative points has in the past been given
to the positive requirements of a successful working of the
competitive system. The functioning of competition not only
requires adequate organisation of certain institutions like
money, markets, and channels of information-some of which
can never be adequately provided by private enterprise-but it
depends above all on the existence of an appropriate legal sys­
tem, a legal system designed both to preserve competition and
to make it operate as beneficially as possible. It is by no means
sufficient that the law should recognise the principle of private
property and freedom of contract; much depends on the precise
definition of the right of property as applied to different things.
The systematic study of the forms of legal institutions which will
make the competitive system work efficiently has been sadly
neglected; and strong arguments can be advanced that serious
shortcomings here, particularly with regard to the law of cor­
porations and of patents, have not only made competition work
much more badly than it might have done, but have even led to
the destruction of competition in many spheres.
There are, finally, undoubted fields where no legal arrange­
ments can create the main condition on which the usefulness
of the system of competition and private property depends:
namely, that the owner benefits from all the useful services
rendered by his property and suffers for all the damages caused40 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
to others by its use. Where, for example, it is impracticable to
make the enjoyment of certain services dependent on the pay­
ment of a price, competition will not produce the services; and
the price system becomes similarly ineffective when the damage
caused to others by certain uses of property cannot be effectively
charged to the owner of that property. In all these instances there
is a divergence between the items which enter into private calcu­
lation and those which affect social welfare; and whenever this
divergence becomes important some method other than com­
petition may have to be found to supply the services in question.
Thus neither the provision of signposts on the roads, nor, in
most circumstances, that of the roads themselves, can be paid for
by every individual user. Nor can certain harmful effects of
deforestation, or of some methods of farming, or of the smoke
and noise of factories, be confined to the owner of the property
in question or to those who are willing to submit to the damage
for an agreed compensation. In such instances we must find
some substitute for the regulation by the price mechanism. But
the fact that we have to resort to the substitution of direct regula­
tion by authority where the conditions for the proper working
of competition cannot be created, does not prove that we should
suppress competition where it can be made to function.
To create conditions in which competition will be as effective
as possible, to supplement it where it cannot be made effective,
to provide the services which, in the words of Adam Smith,
"though they may be in the highest degree advantageous to a
great society, are, however, of such a nature, that the profit could
never repay the expense to any individual or small number
of individuals", these tasks provide indeed a wide and
unquestioned field for state activity. In no system that could be
rationally defended would the state just do nothing. An effective
competitive system needs an intelligently designed and
continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other.
Even the most essential prerequisite of its proper functioning,INDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM 41
the prevention of fraud and deception (including exploitation of
ignorance) provides a great and by no means yet fully accom­
plished object of legislative activity.
* * * * *
The task of creating a suitable framework for the beneficial
working of competition had, however, not yet been carried very
far when states everywhere turned from it to that of supplant­
ing competition by a different and irreconcilable prinCiple. The
question was no longer one of making competition work and
of supplementing it, but of displacing it altogether. It is import­
ant to be quite clear about this: the modern movement for
planning is a movement against competition as such, a new flag
under which all the old enemies of competition have rallied.
And although all sorts of interests are now trying to re-establish
under this flag privileges which the liberal era swept away, it is
socialist propaganda for planning which has restored to
respectability among liberal-minded people opposition to com­
petition, and which has effectively lulled the healthy suspicion
which any attempt to smother competition used to arouse. 1
1 Of late, it is true, some academic socialists, under the spur of criticism, and
animated by the same fear of the extinction of freedom in a centrally planned
society, have devised a new kind of "competitive socialism" which they hope
will avoid the difficulties and dangers of central planning and combine the
abolition of private property with the full retention of individual freedom.
Although some discussion of this new kind of socialism has taken place in
learned journals, it is hardly likely to recommend itself to practical politicians.
If it ever did, it would not he difficult to show (as the author has attempted
elsewhere-see Economica, 1940) that these plans rest on a delusion and suffer
from an inherent contradiction. It is impossible to assume control over all the
productive resources without also deciding for whom and by whom they are
to be used. Although, under this so-called competitive socialism, the planning
by the central authority would take somewhat more roundabout forms, its
effects would not be fundamentally different, and the element of competition
would be little more than a sham.42 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
What in effect unites the socialists of the Left and the Right is
this common hostility to competition and their common
desire to replace it by a directed economy. Though the terms
capitalism and socialism are still generally used to describe the
past and the future forms of society, they conceal rather than
elucidate the nature of the transition through which we are
passing.
Yet, though all the changes we are observing tend in the direc­
tion of a comprehensive central direction of economic activity,
the universal struggle against competition promises to produce
in the first instance something in many respects even worse, a
state of affairs which can satisfy neither planners nor liberals: a
sort of syndicalist or "corporative" organisation of industry, in
which competition is more or less suppressed but planning is
left in the hands of the independent monopolies of the separate
industries. This is the inevitable first result of a situation in
which the people are united in their hostility to competition but
agree on little else. By destroying competition in industry after
industry, this policy puts the consumer at the mercy of the joint
monopolist action of capitalists and workers in the best organ­
ised industries. Yet, although this is a state of affairs which in
wide fields has already existed for some time, and although
much of the muddled (and most of the interested) agitation for
planning aims at it, it is not a state which is likely to persist or
can be rationally justified. Such independent planning by indus­
trial monopolies would, in fact, produce effects opposite to
those at which the argument for planning aims. Once this stage
is reached the only alternative to a return to competition is the
control of the monopolies by the state, a control which, if it is to
be made effective, must become progressively more complete
and more detailed. It is this stage we are rapidly approaching.
When, shortly before the war, one of the weeklies pointed out
that "there were many signs that British leaders are growing
accustomed to thinking in terms of national development byINDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM 43
controlled monopolies", 1 this was probably a true estimate of
the position as it then existed. Since then this process has been
greatly accelerated by the war, and its grave defects and dangers
will become increasingly obvious as time goes on.
The idea of complete centralisation of the direction of eco­
nomic activity still appalls most people, not only because of the
stupendous difficulty of the task, but even more because of the
horror inspired by the idea of everything being directed from a
single centre. If we are nevertheless rapidly moving towards such
a state this is largely because most people still believe that it must
be possible to find some Middle Way between "atomistic" com­
petition and central direction. Nothing indeed seems at first
more plausible, or is more likely to appeal to reasonable people,
than the idea that our goal must be neither the extreme
decentralisation of free competition, nor the complete central­
isation of a single plan, but some judicious mixture of the two
methods. Yet mere common sense proves a treacherous guide in
this field. Although competition can bear some admixture of
regulation, it cannot be combined with planning to any extent
we like without ceasing to operate as an effective guide to pro­
duction. Nor is "planning" a medicine which, taken in small
doses, can produce the effects for which one might hope from
its thoroughgoing application. Both competition and central dir­
ection become poor and inefficient tools if they are incomplete;
they are alternative principles used to solve the same problem,
and a mixture of the two means that neither will really work and
that the result will be worse than if either system had been
consistently relied upon. Or, to express it differently, plan­
ning and competition can be combined only by planning for
competition, but not by planning against competition.
It is of the utmost importance to the argument of this book
for the reader to keep in mind that the planning against which all
1 The Spectator,March 3rd, 1939, p. 337.44 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
our criticism is directed is solely the planning against
competition-the planning which is to be substituted for com­
petition. This is the more important as we cannot, within the
scope of this book, enter into a discussion of the very necessary
planning which is required to make competition as effective and
beneficial as possible. But as in current usage "planning" has
become almost synonymous with the former kind of planning,
it will sometimes be inevitable for the sake of brevity to refer to
it simply as planning, even though this means leaving to our
opponents a very good word meriting a better fate.4
THE "INEVITABILITY" OF
PLANNING
We were the first to assert that the more complicated the
forms of civilisation, the more restricted the freedom of the
individual must become.
B. Musso/ini.
It is a revealing fact that few planners are content to say that
central planning is desirable. Most of them affirm that we can no
longer choose but are compelled by circumstances beyond our
control to substitute planning for competition. The myth is
deliberately cultivated that we are embarking on the new course
not out of free will but because competition is spontaneously
eliminated by technological changes which we neither can
reverse nor should wish to prevent. This argument is rarely
developed at any length-it is one of the assertions taken over by
one writer from another till, by mere iteration, it has come to be
accepted as an established fact. It is, nevertheless, devoid of
foundation. The tendency towards monopoly and planning is46 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
not the result of any "objective facts" beyond our control, but
the product of opinions fostered and propagated for half a
century till they have come to dominate all our policy.
Of the various arguments employed to demonstrate the
inevitability of planning, the one most frequently heard is that
technological changes have made competition impossible in a
constantly increasing number of fields, and that the only choice
left to us is between control of production by private mono­
polies and direction by the government. This belief derives
mainly from the Marxist doctrine of the "concentration of
industry" , although, like so many Marxist ideas, it is now found
in many circles who have received it at third or fourth hand and
do not know whence it derives.
The historical fact of the progressive growth of monopoly
during the last fifty years and the increasing restriction of the
field in which competition rules is, of course, not disputed­
although the extent of the phenomenon is often greatly exagger­
ated. 1 The important question is whether this development is a
necessary consequence of the advance of technology, or
whether it is simply the result of the policies pursued in most
countries. We shall presently see that the actual history of this
development strongly suggests the latter. But we must first con­
sider in how far modern technological developments are of such
a kind as to make the growth of monopolies in wide fields
inevitable.
The alleged technological cause of the growth of monopoly is
the superiority of the large firm over the small, due to the greater
effiCiency of modern methods of mass production. Modern
methods, it is asserted, have created conditions in the majority of
industries where the production of the large firm can be
1 For a fuller discussion of these problems see Professor L. Robbins's essay
on "The Inevitability of Monopoly" in The Economic Basis of Class Conflict, 1939,
pp.45-80.TH E "I N EVITABllITY" OF PLAN N I NG 47
increased at decreasing costs per unit, with the result that the
large firms are everywhere underbidding and driving out the
small ones; this process must go on till in each industry only one
or at most a few giant firms are left. This argument singles out
one effect sometimes accompanying technological progress; it
disregards others which work in the opposite direction; and it
receives little support from a serious study of the facts. We can­
not here investigate this question in detail and must be content
to accept the best evidence available. The most comprehensive
study of the facts undertaken in recent times is that of the Ameri­
can "Temporary National Economic Committee" on the Concen­
trationof EconomicPower. The final report of this Committee (which
certainly cannot be accused of an undue liberal bias) arrives at
the conclusion that the view according to which the greater
efficiency of large-scale production is the cause of the disappear­
ance of competition "finds scant support in any evidence that is
now at hand". 1 And the detailed monograph on the question
which was prepared for the Committee sums up the answer in
this statement:
The superior efficiencyof large establishments has not been
demonstrated; the advantages that are supposed to destroy
competition have failed to manifest themselves in many fields.
Nor do the economies of size, where they exist, invariably
necessitate monopoly.... The size or the sizes of the optimum
efficiencymay be reached long before the major part of a sup­
ply is subjected to such control. The conclusions that the
advantage of large-scale production must lead inevitablyto the
abolition of competition cannot be accepted. It should be
noted, moreover, that monopoly is frequently the product of
factors other than the lower costs of greater size. It is attained
I Final Report and Recommendationsof the Temporary National Economic Committee, 77th
Congress, 1st Session, Senate Document No. 35, 1941, p. 89.48 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
through collusive agreement and promoted by public policies.
When these agreements are invalidated and when these
policies are reversed, competitive conditions can be restored.'
An investigation of conditions in this country would lead to
very similar results. Anyone who has observed how aspiring
monopolists regularly seek and frequently obtain the assistance
of the power of the state to make their control effective can have
little doubt that there is nothing inevitable about this
development.
* * * * *
This conclusion is strongly supported by the historical order in
which the decline of competition and the growth of monopoly
manifested themselves in different countries. If they were the
result of technological developments or a necessary product of
the evolution of "capitalism", we should expect them to appear
first in the countries with the most advanced economic system.
In fact they appeared first during the last third of the nineteenth
century in what were then comparatively young industrial
countries, the United States and Germany. In the latter country
especially, which came to be regarded as the model country
typifying the necessary evolution of capitalism, the growth of
cartels and syndicates has since 1878 been systematically fos­
tered by deliberate policy. Not only the instrument of protec­
tion, but direct inducements and ultimately compulsion, were
used by the governments to further the creation of monopolies
for the regulation of prices and sales. It was here that, with the
help of the state, the first great experiment in "scientific plan­
ning" and "conscious organisation of industry" led to the cre­
ation of giant monopolies, which were represented as inevitable
1 c. Wilcox, Competition and Monopoly in American Industry, Temporary National
Economic Committee, Monograph No. 21, 1940, p. 314.THE "INEVITABILITY" OF PLANNING 49
growths fifty years before the same was done in Great Britain. It
is largely due to the influence of German socialist theoreticians,
particularly Sombart, generalising from the experience of their
country, that the inevitable development of the competitive sys­
tem into "monopoly capitalism" became widely accepted. That
in the United States a highly protectionist policy made a some­
what similar development possible, seemed to confirm this gen­
eralisation. The development of Germany, however, more than
that of the United States, came to be regarded as representative of
a universal tendency; and it became a commonplace to speak­
to quote a widely read political essay of recent date-of
"Germany where all the social and political forces of modern
civilisation have reached their most advanced form". 1
How little there was of inevitability in all this, and how much
is the result of deliberate policy, becomes clear when we con­
sider the position in this country till 193 1 and the development
since that year in which Great Britain also embarked upon a
policy of general protection. It is only a dozen years since, except
for a few industries which had obtained protection earlier,
British industry was on the whole as competitive as, perhaps, at
any time in its history. And, although during the 1920s it suf­
fered severely from incompatible policies followed with regard
to wages and to money, at least the years till 1929 compare with
regard to employment and general activity not unfavourably
with the 1930s. It is only since the transition to protection and
the general change in British economic policy accompanying it,
that the growth of monopolies has proceeded at an amazing rate
and has transformed British industry to an extent the public has
scarcely yet realised. To argue that this development has anything
to do with the technological progress during this period, that
technological necessities which in Germany operated in the
1880s and 1890s, made themselves felt here in the 1930s, is not
1 R. Niebuhr, Moral Man and Immoral Society, 1932.50 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
much less absurd than the claim t implied in the statement of
Mussolini (quoted at the head of this chapter) that Italy had to
abolish individual freedom before other European people
because its civilisation had marched so far in advance of the rest!
In so far as this country is concerned t the thesis that the
change in opinion and policy merely follows an inexorable
change in the facts can be given a certain appearance of truth t
just because England has followed at a distance the intellectual
developments elsewhere. It could thus be argued that monopol­
istic organisation of industry grew up in spite of the fact that
public opinion still favoured competition t but that outside events
frustrated their wishes. The true relation between theory and
practice becomes, however t clear as soon as we look to the proto­
type of this development t Germany. That there the suppression of
competition was a matter of deliberate policyt that it was under­
taken in the service of the ideal which we now call planning t
there can be no doubt. In the progressive advance towards a
completely planned society the Germans t and all the people who
are imitating their example t are merely following the course
which nineteenth-century thinkers t particularly Germans t have
mapped out for them. The intellectual history of the last sixty or
eighty years is indeed a perfect illustration of the truth that in
social evolution nothing is inevitable but thinking makes it so.
* * * * *
The assertion that modern technological progress makes plan­
ning inevitable can also be interpreted in a different manner. It
may mean that the complexity of our modern industrial civilisa­
tion creates new problems with which we cannot hope to deal
effectively except by central planning. In a sense this is true-yet
not in the wide sense in which it is claimed. It iSt for example t a
commonplace that many of the problems created by a modern
tOWllt like many other problems caused by close contiguity in
spacet are not adequately solved by competition. But it is notTHE "INEVITABILITY" OF PLANNING 51
these problems, like those of the "public utilities", etc., which
are uppermost in the minds of those who invoke the complexity
of modern civilisation as an argument for central planning. What
they generally suggest is that the increasing difficulty of obtain­
ing a coherent picture of the complete economic process makes
it indispensable that things should be co-ordinated by some
central agency if social life is not to dissolve in chaos.
This argument is based on a complete misapprehension of the
working of competition. Far from being appropriate only to
comparatively simple conditions, it is the very complexity of the
division of labour under modern conditions which makes com­
petition the only method by which such co-ordination can be
adequately brought about. There would be no difficulty about
efficient control or planning were conditions so simple that a
single person or board could effectively survey all the relevant
facts. It is only as the factors which have to be taken into account
become so numerous that it is impossible to gain a synoptic
view of them, that decentralisation becomes imperative. But
once decentralisation is necessary, the problem of co-ordination
arises, a co-ordination which leaves the separate agencies free to
adjust their activities to the facts which only they can know, and
yet brings about a mutual adjustment of their respective plans.
As decentralisation has become necessary because nobody can
consciously balance all the considerations bearing on the
decisions of so many individuals, the co-ordination can clearly
not be effected by "conscious control", but only by arrange­
ments which convey to each agent the information he must
possess in order effectively to adjust his decisions to those of
others. And because all the details of the changes constantly
affecting the conditions of demand and supply of the different
commodities can never be fully known, or quickly enough be
collected and disseminated, by anyone centre, what is required
is some apparatus of registration which automatically records all
the relevant effects of individual actions, and whose indications52 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
are at the same time the resultant of, and the guide for, all the
individual decisions.
This is precisely what the price system does under competi­
tion, and which no other system even promises to accomplish. It
enables entrepreneurs, by watching the movement of compara­
tively few prices, as an engineer watches the hands of a few dials,
to adjust their activities to those of their fellows. The important
point here is that the price system will fulfil this function only if
competition prevails, that is, if the individual producer has to
adapt himself to price changes and cannot control them. The
more complicated the whole, the more dependent we become
on that division of knowledge between individuals whose separ­
ate efforts are co-ordinated by the impersonal mechanism for
transmitting the relevant information known by us as the price
system.
It is no exaggeration to say that if we had had to rely on
conscious central planning for the growth of our industrial sys­
tem, it would never have reached the degree of differentiation,
complexity, and flexibility it has attained. Compared with this
method of solving the economic problem by means of
decentralisation plus automatic co-ordination, the more obvious
method of central direction is incredibly clumsy, primitive, and
limited in scope. That the division of labour has reached the
extent which makes modern civilisation possible we owe to the
fact that it did not have to be consciously created, but that man
tumbled on a method by which the division of labour could be
extended far beyond the limits within which it could have been
planned. Any further growth of its complexity, therefore, far
from making central direction more necessary, makes it more
important than ever that we should use a technique which does
not depend on conscious control.
* * * * *
There is yet another theory which connects the growth ofTHE uINEVITABILlTY" OF PLANNING 53
monopolies with technological progress, and which uses argu­
ments almost opposite to those we have just considered; though
not often clearly stated, it has also exercised considerable influ­
ence. It contends, not that modern technique destroys competi­
tion, but that, on the contrary, it will be impossible to make use
of many of the new technological possibilities unless protection
against competition is granted, Le., a monopoly is conferred.
This type of argument is not necessarily fraudulent, as the crit­
ical reader will perhaps suspect: the obvious answer, that if a new
technique for satisfying our wants is really better, it ought to be
able to stand up against all competition, does not dispose of all
instances to which this argument refers. No doubt in many cases
it is used merely as a form of special pleading by interested par­
ties. Even more often it is probably based on a confusion between
technical excellence from a narrow engineering point of view
and desirability from the point of view of society as a whole.
There remains, however, a group of instances where the
argument has some force. It is, for example, at least conceivable
that the British automobile industry might be able to supply a
car cheaper and better than cars used to be in the United States if
everyone in this country were made to use the same kind of car;
or that the use of electricity for all purposes could be made
cheaper than coal or gas if everybody could be made to use only
electricity. In instances like these it is at least possible that we
might all be better off, and should prefer the new situation if we
had the choice-but that no individual ever gets the choice,
because the alternative is that either we should all use the same
cheap car (or all should use only electricity), or that we should
have the choice between these things with each of them at a
much higher price. I do not know whether this is true in either
of the instances given. But it must be admitted that it is possible
that by compulsory standardisation or the prohibition of variety
beyond a certain degree, abundance might be increased in some
fields more than sufficiently to compensate for the restriction of54 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
the choice of the consumer. It is even conceivable that a new
invention may be made some day whose adoption would seem
unquestionably beneficial, but which could be used only if many
or all people were made to avail themselves of it at the same time.
Whether such instances are of any great or lasting importance,
they are certainly not instances where it could be legitimately
claimed that technical progress makes central direction inevit­
able. They would merely make it necessary to choose between
gaining a particular advantage by compulsion and not obtaining
it-or, in most instances, obtaining it a little later, when further
technical advance has overcome the particular difficulties. It is
true that in such situations we may have to sacrifice a possible
immediate gain as the price of our freedom-but we avoid, on
the other hand, the necessity of making future developments
dependent upon the knowledge which particular people now
possess. By sacrificing such possible present advantages we pre­
serve an important stimulus to further progress. Though in the
short run the price we have to pay for variety and freedom of
choice may sometin1es be high, in the long run even material
progress will depend on this very variety, because we can never
predict from which of the many forms in which a good or
service can be provided something better may develop. It cannot,
of course, be asserted that the preservation of freedom at the
expense of some addition to our present material comfort will
be thus rewarded in all instances. But the argument for freedom
is precisely that we ought to leave room for the unforeseeable
free growth. It applies, therefore, no less when, on the basis of
our present knowledge, compulsion would seem to bring only
advantages, and although in a particular instance it may actually
do no harm.
In much of the current discussion on the effects of techno­
logical progress this progress is presented to us as if it were
something outside us which could compel us to use the new
knowledge in a particular way. While it is true, of course, thatTH E "I N EVITABI L1TY" OF PLAN N I NG 55
inventions have given us tremendous power, it is absurd to
suggest that we must use this power to destroy our most
precious inheritance: liberty. It does mean, however, that if we
want to preserve it, we must guard it more jealously than ever
and that we must be prepared to make sacrifices for it. While
there is nothing in modern technological developments which
forces us towards comprehensive economic planning, there is a
great deal in them which makes infinitely more dangerous the
power a planning-authority would possess.
* * * * *
While there can thus be little doubt that the movement towards
planning is the result of deliberate action and that there are no
external necessities which force us to it, it is worth enquiring
why so large a proportion of the technical experts should be
found in the front rank of the planners. The explanation of this
phenomenon is closely connected with an important fact which
the critics of the planners should always keep in mind; that there
is little question that almost everyone of the technical ideals of
our experts could be realised within a comparatively short time
if to achieve them were made the sole aim of humanity. There is
an infinite number of good things, which we all agree are highly
desirable as well as possible, but of which we cannot hope to
achieve more than a few within our lifetime, or which we can
hope to achieve only very imperfectly. It is the frustration of his
ambitions in his own field which makes the specialist revolt
against the existing order. We all find it difficult to bear to see
things left undone which everybody must admit are both desir­
able and possible. That these things cannot all be done at the
same time, that anyone of them can be achieved only at the
sacrifice of others, can be seen only by taking into account fac­
tors which fall outside any specialism, which can be appreciated
only by a painful intellectual effort-the more painful as it
forces us to see against a wider background the objects to which56 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
most of our labours are directed, and to balance them against
others which lie outside our immediate interest and for which,
for that reason, we care less.
Everyone of the many things which, considered in isolation,
it would be possible to achieve in a planned society, creates
enthusiasts for planning who feel confident that they will be able
to instil into the directors of such a society their sense of the
value of the particular objective; and the hopes of some of them
would undoubtedly be fulfilled, since a planned society would
certainly further some objectives more than is the case at pres­
ent. It would be foolish to deny that the instances of planned or
semi-planned societies which we know do furnish illustrations
in point, good things which the people of these countries owe
entirely to planning. The magnificent motor roads in Germany
and Italy are an instance often quoted-even though they do not
represent a kind of planning not equally possible in a liberal
society. But it is equally foolish to quote such instances of tech­
nical excellence in particular fields as evidence of the general
superiority of planning. It would be more correct to say that
such extreme technical excellence out of line with general con­
ditions is evidence of a misdirection of resources. Anyone who
has driven along the famous German motor roads and found the
amount of traffic on them less than on many a secondary road in
England, can have little doubt that, so far as peace purposes are
concerned, there was little justification for them. Whether it was
not a case where the planners decided in favour of "guns"
instead of "butter" is another matter. I But by our standards there
is little ground for enthusiasm.
The illusion of the specialist that in a planned society he
would secure more attention to the objectives for which he
cares most is a more general phenomenon than the term of
I But as I am correcting this the news comes that maintenance work on the
German motor roads has been suspended!THE "INEVITABILITY" OF PLANNING 57
specialist at first suggests. In our predilections and interests we
are all in some measure specialists. And we all think that our
personal order of values is not merely personal, but that in a free
discussion among rational people we would convince the others
that ours is the right one. The lover of the country-side who
wants above all that its traditional appearance should be pre­
served and that the blots already made by industry on its fair face
should be removed, no less than the health enthusiast who wants
all the picturesque but insanitary old cottages cleared away, or
the motorist who wishes the country cut up by big motor roads,
the efficiency fanatic who desires the maximum of specialisation
and mechanisation no less than the idealist who for the devel­
opment of personality wants to preserve as many independent
craftsmen as possible, all know that their aim can be fully
achieved only by planning-and they all want planning for that
reason. But, of course, the adoption of the social planning for
which they clamour can only bring out the concealed conflict
between their aims.
The movement for planning owes its present strength largely
to the fact that, while planning is in the main still an ambition, it
unites almost all the single-minded idealists, all the men and
women who have devoted their lives to a single task. The hopes
they place in planning, however, are not the result of a com­
prehensive view of society, but rather of a very limited view, and
often the result of a great exaggeration of the importance of the
ends they place foremost. This is not to underrate the great
pragmatic value of this type of men in a free society like ours,
which makes them the subject of just admiration. But it would
make the very men who are most anxious to plan society the
most dangerous if they were allowed to do so-and the most
intolerant of the planning of others. From the saintly and single­
minded idealist to the fanatic is often but a step. Though it is the
resentment of the frustrated specialist which gives the demand
for planning its strongest impetus, there could hardly be a58 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
more unbearable-and more irrational-world than one in
which the most eminent specialists in each field were allowed to
proceed unchecked with the realisation of their ideals. Nor can
"co-ordination", as some planners seem to imagine, become a
new specialism. The economist is the last to claim that he has the
knowledge which the co-ordinator would need. His plea is for a
method which effects such co-ordination without the need for
an omniscient dictator. But that means precisely the retention
of some such impersonal and often unintelligible checks on
individual efforts as those against which all specialists chafe.5
PLANNING AND DEMOCRACY
The statesman who should attempt to direct private people in
what manner they ought to employ their capitals, would not
only load himself with a most unnecessary attention, but
assume an authority which could safely be trusted to no
council and senate whatever, and which would nowhere be
so dangerous as in the hands of a man who had folly and
presumption enough to fancy himself fit to exercise it.
Adam Smith.
The common features of all collectivist systems may be
described, in a phrase ever dear to socialists of all schools,
as the deliberate organisation of the labours of society for a
definite social goal. That our present society lacks such "con­
scious" direction towards a single aim, that its activities are
guided by the whims and fancies of irresponsible individuals,
has always been one of the main complaints of its socialist
critics.
In many ways this puts the basic issue very clearly. And it
directs us at once to the point where the conflict arises between60 THE R0 A D TO S E RFDO M
individual freedom and collectivism. The various kinds of
collectivism, communism, fascism, etc., differ between them­
selves in the nature of the goal towards which they want to
direct the efforts of society. But they all differ from liberalism
and individualism in wanting to organise the whole of society
and all its resources for this unitary end, and in refusing to
recognise autonomous spheres in which the ends of the indi­
viduals are supreme. In short, they are totalitarian in the true
sense of this new word which we have adopted to describe the
unexpected but nevertheless inseparable manifestations of what
in theory we call collectivism.
The "social goal", or "common purpose", for which society
is to be organised, is usually vaguely described as the "common
good", or the "general welfare", or the "general interest". It
does not need much reflection to see that these terms have no
suffiCiently definite meaning to determine a particular course of
action. The welfare and the happiness of millions cannot be
measured on a single scale of less and more. The welfare of a
people, like the happiness of a man, depends on a great many
things that can be provided in an infinite variety of combina­
tions. It cannot be adequately expressed as a single end, but
only as a hierarchy of ends, a comprehensive scale of values in
which every need of every person is given its place. To direct all
our activities according to a single plan presupposes that every
one of our needs is given its rank in an order of values which
must be complete enough to make it possible to decide between
all the different courses between which the planner has to
choose. It presupposes, in short, the existence of a complete
ethical code in which all the different human values are allotted
their due place.
The conception of a complete ethical code is unfamiliar and it
requires some effort of imagination to see what it involves. We
are not in the habit of thinking of moral codes as more or less
complete. The fact that we are constantly choosing betweenPLANNING AND DEMOCRACY 61
different values without a social code prescribing how we ought
to choose, does not surprise us, and does not suggest to us that
our moral code is incomplete. In our society there is neither
occasion nor reason why people should develop common views
about what should be done in such situations. But where all the
means to be used are the property of society, and are to be used
in the name of society according to a unitary plan, a "social"
view about what ought to be done must guide all decisions. In
such a world we should soon find that our moral code is full of
gaps.
We are not concerned here with the question whether it
would be desirable to have such a complete ethical code. It may
merely be pointed out that up to the present the growth of
civilisation has been accompanied by a steady diminution of the
sphere in which individual actions are bound by fixed rules. The
rules of which our common moral code consists have progres­
sively become fewer and more general in character. From the
primitive man who was bound by an elaborate ritual in almost
everyone of his daily activities, who was limited by innumerable
taboos, and who could scarcely conceive of doing things in a
way different from his fellows, morals have more and more
tended to become merely limits circumscribing the sphere
within which the individual could behave as he liked. The adop­
tion of a common ethical code comprehensive enough to
determine a unitary economic plan would mean a complete
reversal of this tendency.
The essential point for us is that no such complete ethical
code exists. The attempt to direct all economic activity according
to a single plan would raise innumerable questions to which the
answer could be provided only by a moral rule, but to which
existing morals have no answer and where there exists no agreed
view on what ought to be done. People will have either no
definite views or conflicting views on such questions, because in
the free society in which we have lived there has been no62 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
occasion to think about them and still less to form common
opinions about them.
* * * * *
Not only do we not possess such an all-inclusive scale of values:
it would be impossible for any mind to comprehend the infin­
ite variety of different needs of different people which compete
for the available resources and to attach a definite weight to
each. For our problem it is of minor importance whether the
ends for which any person cares comprehend only his own
individual needs, or whether they include the needs of his
closer or even those of his more distant fellows-that is,
whether he is egoistic or altruistic in the ordinary senses of
these words. The point which is so important is the basic fact
that it is impossible for any man to survey more than a limited
field, to be aware of the urgency of more than a limited number
of needs. Whether his interests centre round his own physical
needs, or whether he takes a warm interest in the welfare of
every human being he knows, the ends about which he can be
concerned will always be only an infinitesimal fraction of the
needs of all men.
This is the fundamental fact on which the whole philosophy
of individualism is based. It does not assume, as is often asserted,
that man is egoistic or selfish, or ought to be. It merely starts
from the indisputable fact that the limits of our powers of
imagination make it impossible to include in our scale of values
more than a sector of the needs of the whole society, and that,
since, strictly speaking, scales of value can exist only in indi­
vidual minds, nothing but partial scales of values exist, scales
which are inevitably different and often inconsistent with each
other. From this the individualist concludes that the individuals
should be allowed, within defined limits, to follow their own
values and preferences rather than somebody else's, that within
these spheres the individual's system of ends should be supremePLANNING AND DEMOCRACY 63
and not subject to any dictation by others. It is this recognition
of the individual as the ultimate judge of his ends, the belief that
as far as possible his own views ought to govern his actions, that
forms the essence of the individualist position.
This view does not, of course, exclude the recognition of
social ends, or rather of a coincidence of individual ends which
makes it advisable for men to combine for their pursuit. But it
limits such common action to the instances where individual
views coincide; what are called "social ends" are for it merely
identical ends of many individuals-or ends to the achievement
of which individuals are willing to contribute in return for the
assistance they receive in the satisfaction of their own desires.
Common action is thus limited to the fields where people agree
on common ends. Very frequently these common ends will not
be ultimate ends to the individuals, but means which different
persons can use for different purposes. In fact, people are most
likely to agree on common action where the common end is not
an ultimate end to them, but a means capable of serving a great
variety of purposes.
When individuals combine in a joint effort to realise ends
they have in common, the organisations, like the state, that they
form for this purpose, are given their own system of ends and
their own means. But any organisation thus formed remains one
"person" among others, in the case of the state much more
powerful than any of the others, it is true, yet still with its
separate and limited sphere in which alone its ends are supreme.
The limits of this sphere are determined by the extent to which
the individuals agree on particular ends; and the probability that
they will agree on a particular course of action necessarily
decreases as the scope of such action extends. There are certain
functions of the state on the exercise of which there will be
practical unanimity among its citizens; there will be others on
which there will be agreement of a substantial majority; and
so on, till we come to fields where, although each individual64 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
might wish the state to act in some way, there will be almost as
many views about what the government should do as there are
different people.
We can rely on voluntary agreement to guide the action of the
state only so long as it is confined to spheres where agreement
exists. But not only when the state undertakes direct control in
fields where there is no such agreement is it bound to suppress
individual freedom. We can unfortunately not indefinitely
extend the sphere of common action and still leave the indi­
vidual free in his own sphere. Once the communal sector, in
which the state controls all the means, exceeds a certain propor­
tion of the whole, the effects of its actions dominate the whole
system. Although the state controls directly the use of only a
large part of the available resources, the effects of its decisions on
the remaining part of the economic system become so great that
indirectly it controls almost everything. Where, as was, for
example, true in Germany as early as 1928, the central and local
authorities directly control the use of more than half the national
income (according to an official German estimate then, S3 per
cent.) they control indirectly almost the whole economic life of
the nation. There is, then, scarcely an individual end which is
not dependent for its achievement on the action of the state, and
the "social scale of values" which guides the state's action must
embrace practically all individual ends.
* * * * *
It is not difficult to see what must be the consequences when
democracy embarks upon a course of planning which in its
execution requires more agreement than in fact exists. The
people may have agreed on adopting a system of directed econ­
omy because they have been convinced that it will produce great
prosperity. In the discussions leading to the decision, the goal of
planning will have been described by some such term as "com­
mon welfare" which only conceals the absence of real agreementPLANNING AND DEMOCRACY 65
on the ends of planning. Agreement will in fact exist only on the
mechanism to be used. But it is a mechanism which can be used
only for a common end; and the question of the precise goal
towards which all activity is to be directed will arise as soon as
the executive power has to translate the demand for a single plan
into a particular plan. Then it will appear that the agreement on
the desirability of planning is not supported by agreement on
the ends the plan is to serve. The effect of the people agreeing
that there must be central planning, without agreeing on the
ends, will be rather as if a group of people were to commit
themselves to take a journey together without agreeing where
they want to go: with the result that they may all have to make a
journey which most of them do not want at all. That planning
creates a situation in which it is necessary for us to agree on a
much larger number of topics than we have been used to, and
that in a planned system we cannot confine collective action to
the tasks on which we can agree, but are forced to produce
agreement on everything in order that any action can be taken at
all, is one of the features which contribute more than most to
determining the character of a planned system.
It may have been the unanimously expressed will of the
people that parliament should prepare a comprehensive eco­
nomic plan, yet neither the people nor its representatives need
therefore be able to agree on any particular plan. The inability of
democratic assemblies to carry out what seems to be a clear
mandate of the people will inevitably cause dissatisfaction with
democratic institutions. Parliaments come to be regarded as
ineffective "talking shops", unable or incompetent to carry out
the tasks for which they have been chosen. The conviction grows
that if efficient planning is to be done, the direction must be
"taken out of politics" and placed in the hands of experts,
permanent officials or independent autonomous bodies.
The difficulty is well known to socialists. It will soon be half a
century since the Webbs began to complain of "the increased66 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
incapacity of the House of Commons to cope with its work". 1
More recently, Professor Laski has elaborated the argument:
It is common ground that the present parliamentary
machine is quite unsuited to pass rapidly a great body of com­
plicated legislation. The National Government, indeed, has in
substance admitted this by implementing its economy and tariff
measures not by detailed debate in the House of Commons
but by a wholesale system of delegated legislation. A Labour
Government would, I presume, build upon the amplitude of
this precedent. It would confine the House of Commons to the
two functions it can properly perform: the ventilation of griev­
ances and the discussion of general principles of its measures.
Its Bills would take the form of general formul~ conferring
wide powers on the appropriate government departments; and
those powers would be exercised by Order in Council which
could, if desired, be attacked in the House by means of a vote
of no confidence. The necessity and value of delegated legisla­
tion has recently been strongly reaffirmed by the Donoughmore
Committee; and its extension is inevitable if the process of
socialisation is not to be wrecked by the normal methods of
obstruction which existing parliamentary procedure sanctions.
And to make it quite clear that a socialist government must not
allow itself to be too much fettered by democratic procedure,
Professor Laski at the end of the same article raised the question
"whether in a period of transition to Socialism, a Labour
Government can risk the overthrow of its measures as a result of
the next general election" -and left it significantly unanswered. 2
* * * * *
I S. and B. Webb, IndustrialDemocracy, 1897, p. 800, footnote.
2 H. J. Laski, "Labour and the Constitution", The New Statesmanand Nation, No. 81
(New Series), Sept. 10th, 1932, p. 277. In a book (Democracy in Crisis, 1933,PLANNING AND DEMOCRACY 67
It is important clearly to see the causes of this admitted inef­
fectiveness of parliaments when it comes to a detailed adminis­
tration of the economic affairs of a nation. The fault is neither
with the individual representatives nor with parliamentary
institutions as such, but with the contradictions inherent in the
task with which they are charged. They are not asked to act
where they can agree, but to produce agreement on
everything-the whole direction of the resources of the nation.
For such a task the system of majority decision is, however, not
suited. Majorities will be found where it is a choice between
limited alternatives; but it is a superstition to believe that there
must be a majority view on everything. There is no reason why
there should be a majority in favour of anyone of the different
possible courses of positive action if their number is legion.
Every member of the legislative assembly might prefer some
particular plan for the direction of economic activity to no plan,
yet no one plan may appear preferable to a majority to no plan
at all.
Nor can a coherent plan be achieved by breaking it up into
parts and voting on particular issues. A democratic assembly
voting and amending a comprehensive economic plan clause by
clause, as it deliberates on an ordinary bill, makes nonsense. An
particularly p. 87) in which Professor Laski later elaborated these ideas, his
determination that parliamentary democracy must not be allowed to form an
obstacle to the realisation of socialism is even more plainly expressed: not only
would a socialist government "take vast powers and legislate under them by
ordinance and decree" and "suspend the classic formul~ of normal oppo­
sition", but the U continuance of parliamentary government would depend on
its [i.e. the Labour Government's] possession of guarantees from the Conserva­
tive Party that its work of transformation would not be disrupted by repeal in
the event of its defeat at the polls"!
As Professor Laski invokes the authority of the Donoughmore Committee it
may be worth recalling that Professor Laski was a member of that committee
and presumably one of the authors of its report.68 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
economic plan, to deserve the name, must have a unitary con­
ception. Even if parliament could, proceeding step by step, agree
on some scheme, it would certainly in the end satisfy nobody. A
complex whole where all the parts must be most carefully
adjusted to each other, cannot be achieved through a comprom­
ise between conflicting views. To draw up an economic plan in
this fashion is even less possible than, for example, successfully
to plan a military campaign by democratic procedure. As in
strategy it would become inevitable to delegate the task to the
experts.
Yet the difference is that, while the general who is put in
charge of a campaign is given a single end to which, for the
duration of the campaign, all the means under his control have
to be exclusively devoted, there can be no such single goal
given to the economic planner, and no similar limitation of the
means imposed upon him. The general has not got to balance
different independent aims against each other; there is for him
only one supreme goal. But the ends of an economic plan, or
of any part of it, cannot be defined apart from the particular
plan. It is the essence of the economic problem that the making
of an economic plan involves the choice between conflicting or
competing ends-different needs of different people. But
which ends do so conflict, which will have to be sacrificed if
we want to achieve certain others, in short, which are the
alternatives between which we must choose, can only be
known to those who know all the facts; and only they, the
experts, are in a position to decide which of the different ends
are to be given preference. It is inevitable that they should
impose their scale of preferences on the community for which
they plan.
This is not always clearly recognised and delegation is usually
justified by the technical character of the task. But this does not
mean that only the technical detail is delegated, or even that the
inability of parliaments to understand the technical detail isPLANNING AND DEMOCRACY 69
the root of the difficulty. 1 Alterations in the structure of civil law
are no less technical and no more difficult to appreciate in all
their implications; yet nobody has yet seriously suggested that
legislation there should be delegated to a body of experts. The
fact is that in these fields legislation does not go beyond general
rules on which true majority agreement can be achieved, while
in the direction of economic activity the interests to be recon­
ciled are so divergent that no true agreement is likely to be
reached in a democratic assembly.
It should be recognised, however, that it is not the delegation
of law-making power as such, which is so objectionable. To
oppose delegation as such is to oppose a symptom instead of the
1 It is instructive in this connection briefly to refer to the Government docu­
ment in which in recent years these problems have been discussed. As long as
thirteen years ago, that is before this country finally abandoned economic
liberalism, the process of delegating legislative powers had already been carried
to a point where it was felt necessary to appoint a committee to investigate
"what safeguards are desirable or necessary to secure the sovereignty of Law".
In its report the "Donoughmore Committee" (Report of the [Lord Chancellor's]
Committee on Ministers' Powers, Cmd. 4060, 1932) showed that even at that date
Parliament had resorted "to the practice of wholesale and indiscriminate dele­
gation" but regarded this (it was before we had really glanced into the totali­
tarian abyss!) as an inevitably and relatively innocuous development. And it is
probably true that delegation as such need not be a danger to freedom. The
interesting point is why delegation had become necessary on such a scale. First
place among the causes enumerated in the report is given to the fact that
"Parliament nowadays passes so many laws every year" and that "much of the
detail is so technical as to be unsuitable for Parliamentary discussion". But if
this were all there would be no reason why the detail should not be worked out
before rather than after Parliament passes a law. What is probably in many cases a
much more important reason why, "if Parliament were not willing to delegate
law-making power, Parliament would be unable to pass the kind and quantity
of legislation which public opinion requires" is innocently revealed in the little
sentence that "many of the laws affect people's lives so closely that elasticity is
essential"! What does this mean if not conferment of arbitrary power, power
limited by no fixed principles and which in the opinion of Parliament cannot
be limited by definite and unambiguous rules?70 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
cause and, as it may be a necessary result of other causes, to
weaken the case. So long as the power that is delegated is merely
the power to make general rules, there may be very good
reasons why such rules should be laid down by local rather than
by the central authority. The objectionable feature is that delega­
tion is so often resorted to because the matter in hand cannot be
regulated by general rules but only by the exercise of discretion
in the decision of particular cases. In these instances delegation
means that some authority is given power to make with the
force of law what to all intents and purposes are arbitrary
decisions (usually described as "judging the case on its
merits").
The delegation of particular technical tasks to separate bodies,
while a regular feature, is yet only the first step in the process
whereby a democracy which embarks on planning progressively
relinquishes its powers. The expedient of delegation cannot
really remove the causes which make all the advocates of com­
prehensive planning so impatient with the impotence of dem­
ocracy. The delegation of particular powers to separate agencies
creates a new obstacle to the achievement of a single co­
ordinated plan. Even if, by this expedient, a democracy should
succeed in planning every sector of economic activity, it would
still have to face the problem of integrating these separate plans
into a unitary whole. Many separate plans do not make a planned
whole-in fact, as the planners ought to be the first to admit­
they may be worse than no plan. But the democratic legislature
will long hesitate to relinquish the decisions on really vital
issues, and so long as it does so it makes it impossible for anyone
else to provide the comprehensive plan. Yet agreement that plan­
ning is necessary, together with the inability of democratic
assemblies to produce a plan, will evoke stronger and stronger
demands that the government or some single individual should
be given powers to act on their own responsibility. The belief is
becoming more and more widespread that, if things are to getPLANNING AND DEMOCRACY 71
done, the responsible authorities must be freed from the fetters
of democratic procedure.
The cry for an economic dictator is a characteristic stage in the
movement towards planning, not unfamiliar in this country. It is
now several years since one of the most acute of foreign students
of England, the late Elie Halt~vy, suggested that "if you take a
composite photograph of Lord Eustace Percy, Sir Oswald Mosley,
and Sir Stafford Cripps, I think you would find this common
feature-you would find them all agreeing to say: 'We are living
in economic chaos and we cannot get out of it except under some
kind of dictatorial leadership' ." 1 The number of influential pub­
lic men whose inclusion would not materially alter the features
of the "composite photograph" has since grown considerably.
In Germany, even before Hitler came into power, the move­
ment had already progressed much further. It is important to
remember that for some time before 1933 Germany had reached
a stage in which it had, in effect, had to be governed dictatori­
ally. Nobody could then doubt that for the time being dem­
ocracy had broken down, and that sincere democrats like
Briining were no more able to govern democratically than
Schleicher or von Papen. Hitler did not have to destroy demo­
cracy; he merely took advantage of the decay of democracy and
at the critical moment obtained the support of many to whom,
though they detested Hitler, he yet seemed the only man strong
enough to get things done.
* * * * *
The argument by which the planners usually try to reconcile us
with this development is that so long as democracy retains
ultimate control, the essentials of democracy are not affected.
Thus Karl Mannheim writes:
1 "Socialism and the Problems of Democratic Parliamentarism", International
Affairs,vol. XIII, p. 501.72 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
The only [sic] way in which a planned society differs from that
of the nineteenth century is that more and more spheres of
social life, and ultimately each and all of them, are subjected to
state control. But if a few controls can be held in check by
parliamentary sovereignty, so can many.... in a democratic
state sovereignty can be boundlessly strengthened by plenary
powers without renouncing democratic control.
l
This belief overlooks a vital distinction. Parliament can, of
course, control the execution of tasks where it can give definite
directions, where it has first agreed on the aim and merely dele­
gates the working out of the detail. The situation is entirely
different when the reason for the delegation is that there is no
real agreement on the ends, when the body charged with the
planning has to choose between ends of whose conflict parlia­
ment is not even aware, and when the most that can be done is to
present to it a plan which has to be accepted or rejected as a
whole. There may and probably will be criticism; but as no
majority can agree on an alternative plan, and the parts objected
to can almost always be represented as essential parts of the
whole, it will remain quite ineffective. Parliamentary discussion
may be retained as a useful safety-valve, and even more as a
convenient medium through which the official answers to com­
plaints are disseminated. It may even prevent some flagrant
abuses and successfully insist on particular shortcomings being
remedied. But it cannot direct. It will at best be reduced to
choosing the persons who are to have practically absolute power.
The whole system will tend towards that plebiscitarian dictator­
ship in which the head of the government is from time to time
confirmed in his position by popular vote, but where he has all
the powers at his command to make certain that the vote will go
in the direction he desires.
I K. Mannheim, Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction,1940, p. 340.PLANNING AND DEMOCRACY 73
It is the price of democracy that the possibilities of conscious
control are restricted to the fields where true agreement exists,
and that in some fields things must be left to chance. But in a
society which for its functioning depends on central planning,
this control cannot be made dependent on a majority being able
to agree; it will often be necessary that the will of a small minor­
ity be imposed upon the people, because this minority will be
the largest group able to agree among themselves on the ques­
tion at issue. Democratic government has worked successfully
where, and so long as, the functions of government were, by a
widely accepted creed, restricted to fields where agreement
among a majority could be achieved by free discussion; and it is
the great merit of the liberal creed that it reduced the range of
subjects on which agreement was necessary to one on which it
was likely to exist in a society of free men. It is now often said
that democracy will not tolerate "capitalism". If "capitalism"
means here a competitive system based on free disposal over
private property, it is far more important to realise that only
within this system is democracy possible. When it becomes
dominated by a collectivist creed, democracy will inevitably
destroy itself.
* * * * *
We have no intention, however, of making a fetish of democracy.
It may well be true that our generation talks and thinks too much
of democracy and too little of the values which it serves. It
cannot be said of democracy, as Lord Acton truly said of liberty,
that it "is not a means to a higher political end. It is itself the
highest political end. It is not for the sake of a good public
administration that it is required, but for the security in the
pursuit of the highest objects of civil society, and of private life."
Democracy is essentially a means, a utilitarian device for safe­
guarding internal peace and individual freedom. As such it is by
no means infallible or certain. Nor must we forget that there has74 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
often been much more cultural and spiritual freedom under an
autocratic rule than under some democracies-and it is at least
conceivable that under the government of a very homogeneous
and doctrinaire majority democratic government might be as
oppressive as the worst dictatorship. Our point, however, is not
that dictatorship must inevitably extirpate freedom, but rather
that planning leads to dictatorship because dictatorship is the
most effective instrument of coercion and the enforcement of
ideals, and as such essential if central planning on a large scale is
to be possible. The clash between planning and democracy arises
simply from the fact that the latter is an obstacle to the suppres­
sion of freedom which the direction of economic activity
requires. But in so far as democracy ceases to be a guarantee of
individual freedom, it may well persist in some form under a
totalitarian regime. A true" dictatorship of the proletariat", even
if democratic in form, if it undertook centrally to direct the
economic system, would probably destroy personal freedom as
completely as any autocracy has ever done.
The fashionable concentration on democracy as the main
value threatened is not without danger. It is largely responsible
for the misleading and unfounded belief that so long as the
ultimate source of power is the will of the majority, the power
cannot be arbitrary. The false assurance which many people
derive from this belief is an important cause of the general
unawareness of the dangers which we face. There is no justifica­
tion for the belief that so long as power is conferred by demo­
cratic procedure, it cannot be arbitrary; the contrast suggested by
this statement is altogether false: it is not the source but the
limitation of power which prevents it from being arbitrary.
Democratic control may prevent power from becoming arbitrary,
but it does not do so by its mere existence. If democracy resolves
on a task which necessarily involves the use of power which
cannot be guided by fixed rules, it must become arbitrary power.6
PLANNING
AND THE RULE
OF LAW
Recent studies in the sociology of law once more confirm that
the fundamental principle of formal law by which every case
must be judged according to general rational precepts, which
have as few exceptions as possible and are based on logical
subsumptions, obtains only for the liberal competitive phase
of capitalism.
K. Mannheim.
Nothing distinguishes more clearly conditions in a free country
from those in a country under arbitrary government than the
observance in the former of the great principles known as the
Rule of Law. Stripped of all technicalities this means that gov­
ernment in all its actions is bound by rules fixed and announced
beforehand-rules which make it possible to foresee with fair
certainty how the authority will use its coercive powers in given
circumstances, and to plan one's individual affairs on the basis of76 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
this knowledge.
1
Though this ideal can never be perfectly
achieved, since legislators as well as those to whom the adminis­
tration of the law is entrusted are fallible men, the essential
point, that the discretion left to the executive organs wielding
coercive power should be reduced as much as possible, is clear
enough. While every law restricts individual freedom to some
extent by altering the means which people may use in the pur­
suit of their aims, under the Rule of Law the government is
prevented from stultifying individual efforts by ad hoc action.
Within the known rules of the game the individual is free to
pursue his personal ends and desires, certain that the powers of
government will not be used deliberately to frustrate his efforts.
The distinction we have drawn before between the creation of
a permanent framework of laws within which the productive
activity is guided by individual decisions, and the direction of
economic activity by a central authority, is thus really a particu­
1ar case of the more general distinction between the Rule of Law
and arbitrary government. Under the first the government con­
fines itself to fixing rules determining the conditions under
which the available resources may be used, leaving to the indi­
viduals the decision for what ends they are to be used. Under the
second the government directs the use of the means of produc­
tion to particular ends. The first type of rules can be made in
I According to the classical exposition by A. V. Dicey in The Law of the Constitution
(8th ed., p. 198) the rule of law "means, in the first place, the absolute suprem­
acy or predominance of regular law as opposed to the influence of arbitrary
power, and excludes the existence of arbitrariness, of prerogative, or even of
wide discretionary authority on the part of government". Largely as a result of
Dicey's work the term has, however, in England acquired a narrower technical
meaning which does not concern us here. The wider and older meaning of the
concept of the rule or reign of law, which in England had become an estab­
lished tradition which was more taken for granted than discussed, has been
most fully elaborated, just because it raised what were there new problems, in
the early nineteenth -century discussions in Germany about the nature of the
Rechtsstaat.P LA N N I N G AND THE RU LEO F LA W 77
advance, in the shape of formal rules which do not aim at the wants
and needs of particular people. They are intended to be merely
instrumental in the pursuit of people's various individual ends.
And they are, or ought to be, intended for such long periods that
it is impossible to know whether they will assist particular
people more than others. They could almost be described as a
kind of instrument of production, helping people to predict the
behaviour of those with whom they must collaborate, rather
than as efforts towards the satisfaction of particular needs.
Economic planning of the collectivist kind necessarily involves
the very opposite of this. The planning authority cannot confine
itself to providing opportunities for unknown people to make
whatever use of them they like. It cannot tie itself down in
advance to general and formal rules which prevent arbitrariness.
It must provide for the actual needs of people as they arise and
then choose deliberately between them. It must constantly
decide questions which cannot be answered by formal principles
only, and in making these decisions it must set up distinctions of
merit between the needs of different people. When the govern­
ment has to decide how many pigs are to be reared or how many
buses are to be run, which coal mines are to operate, or at what
prices boots are to be sold, these decisions cannot be deduced
from formal principles, or settled for long periods in advance.
They depend inevitably on the circumstances of the moment,
and in making such decisions it will always be necessary to
balance one against the other the interests of various persons and
groups. In the end somebody's views will have to decide whose
interests are more important; and these views must become part
of the law of the land, a new distinction of rank which the
coercive apparatus of government imposes upon the people.
* * * * *
The distinction we have just used between formal law or justice
and substantive rules is very important and at the same time78 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
most difficult to draw precisely in practice. Yet the general prin­
ciple involved is simple enough. The difference between the two
kinds of rules is the same as that between laying down a Rule of
the Road, as in the Highway Code, and ordering people where to
go; or, better still, between providing signposts and command­
ing people which road to take. The formal rules tell people in
advance what action the state will take in certain types of situ­
ation' defined in general terms, without reference to time and
place or particular people. They refer to typical situations into
which anyone may get and in which the existence of such rules
will be useful for a great variety of individual purposes. The
knowledge that in such situations the state will act in a definite
way, or require people to behave in a certain manner, is provided
as a means for people to use in making their own plans. Formal
rules are thus merely instrumental in the sense that they are
expected to be useful to yet unknown people, for purposes
for which these people will decide to use them, and in
circumstances which cannot be foreseen in detail. In fact, that we
do not know their concrete effect, that we do not know what
particular ends these rules will further, or which particular
people they will assist, that they are merely given the form most
likely on the whole to benefit all the people affected by them, is
the most important criterion of formal rules in the sense in
which we here use this term. They do not involve a choice
between particular ends or particular people, because we just
cannot know beforehand by whom and in what way they will be
used.
In our age, with its passion for conscious control of every­
thing, it may appear paradoxical to claim as a virtue that under
one system we shall know less about the particular effect of the
measures the state takes than would be true under most other
systems and that a method of social control should be deemed
superior because of our ignorance of its precise results. Yet this
consideration is in fact the rationaleof the great liberal principle ofP LA N N I N G AND THE RU LEO F LA W 79
the Rule of Law. And the apparent paradox dissolves rapidly
when we follow the argument a little further.
* * * * *
This argument is two-fold; the first is economic and can here
only briefly be stated. The state should confine itself to establish­
ing rules applying to general types of situations, and should
allow the individuals freedom in everything which depends on
the circumstances of time and place, because only the indi­
viduals concerned in each instance can fully know these circum­
stances and adapt their actions to them. If the individuals are to
be able to use their knowledge effectively in making plans, they
must be able to predict actions of the state which may affect
these plans. But if the actions of the state are to be predictable,
they must be determined by rules fixed independently of the
concrete circumstances which can neither be foreseen nor taken
into account beforehand: and the particular effects of such
actions will be unpredictable. If, on the other hand, the state
were to direct the individual's actions so as to achieve particular
ends, its action would have to be decided on the basis of the full
circumstances of the moment a"nd would therefore be
unpredictable. Hence the familiar fact that the more the state
"plans" the more difficult planning becomes for the individual.
The second, moral or political, argument is even more directly
relevant to the point under discussion. If the state is precisely to
foresee the incidence of its actions, it means that it can leave
those affected no choice. Wherever the state can exactly foresee
the effects on particular people of alternative courses of action, it
is also the state which chooses between the different ends. If we
want to create new opportunities open to all, to offer chances of
which people can make what use they like, the precise results
cannot be foreseen. General rules, genuine laws as distinguished
from specific orders, must therefore be intended to operate in
circumstances which cannot be foreseen in detail, and, therefore,80 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
their effect on particular ends or particular people cannot be
known beforehand. It is in this sense alone that it is at all possible
for the legislator to be impartial. To be impartial means to have
no answer to certain questions-to the kind of questions which,
if we have to decide them, we decide by tossing a coin. In a
world where everything was precisely foreseen, the state could
hardly do anything and remain impartial. But where the precise
effects of government policy on particular people are known,
where the government aims directly at such particular effects, it
cannot help knowing these effects, and therefore it cannot be
impartial. It must, of necessity, take sides, impose its valuations
upon people and, instead of assisting them in the advancement
of their own ends, choose the ends for them. As soon as the
particular effects are foreseen at the time a law is made, it ceases
to be a mere instrument to be used by the people and becomes
instead an instrument used by the law-giver upon the people
and for his ends. The state ceases to be a piece of utilitarian
machinery intended to help individuals in the fullest develop­
ment of their individual personality and becomes a "moral"
institution-where "moral" is not used in contrast to immoral,
but describes an institution which imposes on its members its
views on all moral questions, whether these views be moral or
highly immoral. In this sense the Nazi or any other collectivist
state is "moral", while the liberal state is not.
Perhaps it will be said that all this raises no serious problem
because in the kind of questions which the economic planner
would have to decide he need not and should not be guided by
his individual prejudices, but could rely on the general convic­
tion of what is fair and reasonable. This contention usually
receives support from those who have experience of planning in
a particular industry and who find that there is no insuperable
difficulty about arriving at a decision which all those immedi­
ately interested will accept as fair. The reason why this experi­
ence proves nothing is, of course, the selection of the "interests"P LA N N I N G AND THE RU LEO F LAW 81
concerned when planning is confined to a particular industry.
Those most immediately interested in a particular issue are not
necessarily the best judges of the interests of society as a whole.
To take only the most characteristic case: when capital and
labour in an industry agree on some policy of restriction and
thus exploit the consumers, there is usually no difficulty about
the division of the spoils in proportion to former earnings or on
some similar principle. The loss which is divided between thou­
sands or millions is usually either simply disregarded or quite
inadequately considered. If we want to test the usefulness of the
principle of "fairness" in deciding the kind of issues which arise
in economic planning, we must apply it to some question where
the gains and the losses are seen equally clearly. In such instances
it is readily recognised that no general principle such as fairness
can provide an answer. When we have to choose between higher
wages for nurses or doctors and more extensive services for the
sick, more milk for children and better wages for agricultural
workers, or between employment for the unemployed or better
wages for those already employed, nothing short of a complete
system of values in which every want of every person or group
has a definite place is necessary to provide an answer.
In fact, as planning becomes more and more extensive, it
becomes regularly necessary to qualify legal provisions increas­
ingly by reference to what is "fair" or "reasonable"; this means
that it becomes necessary to leave the decision of the concrete
case more and more to the discretion of the judge or authority in
question. One could write a history of the decline of the Rule of
Law, the disappearance of the Rechtsstaat,in terms of the progres­
sive introduction of these vague formulce into legislation and
jurisdiction, and of the increasing arbitrariness and uncertainty
of, and the consequent disrespect for, the law and the judicature,
which in these circumstances could not but become an instru­
ment of policy. It is important to point out once more in this
connection that this process of the decline of the Rule of Law82 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
had been going on steadily in Germany for some time before
Hitler came into power, and that a policy well advanced towards
totalitarian planning had already done a great deal of the work
which Hitler completed.
There can be no doubt that planning necessarily involves
deliberate discrimination between particular needs of different
people, and allowing one man to do what another must be
prevented from doing. It must lay down by a legal rule how well
off particular people shall be and what different people are to be
allowed to have and do. It means in effect a return to the rule of
status, a reversal of the "movement of progressive societies"
which, in the famous phrase of Sir Henry Maine, "has hitherto
been a movement from status to contract". Indeed, the Rule of
Law, more than the rule of contract, should probably be regarded
as the true opposite of the rule of status. It is the Rule of Law, in
the sense of the rule of formal law, the absence of legal privileges
of particular people designated by authority, which safeguards
that equality before the law which is the opposite of arbitrary
government.
* * * * *
A necessary, and only apparently paradoxical, result of this is that
formal equality before the law is in conflict, and in fact
incompatible, with any activity of the government deliberately
aiming at material or substantive equality of different people,
and that any policy aiming at a substantive ideal of distributive
justice must lead to the destruction of the Rule of Law. To pro­
duce the same result for different people it is necessary to treat
them differently. To give different people the same objective
opportunities is not to give them the same subjective chance. It
cannot be denied that the Rule of Law produces economic
inequality-all that can be claimed for it is that this inequality is
not designed to affect particular people in a particular way. It is
very significant and characteristic that socialists (and Nazis) haveP LA N N I N G AND THE RU LEO F LAW 83
always protested against "merely" formal justice, that they have
always objected to a law which had no views on how well off
particular people ought to be,l and that they have always
demanded a "socialisation of the law", attacked the independ­
ence of judges, and at the same time given their support to all
such movements as the Freirechtsschulewhich undermined the
Rule of Law.
It may even be said that for the Rule of Law to be effective it is
more important that there should be a rule applied always with­
out exceptions, than what this rule is. Often the content of the
rule is indeed of minor importance, provided the same rule is
universally enforced. To revert to a former example: it does not
matter whether we all drive on the left- or on the right-hand
side of the road so long as we all do the same. The important
thing is that the rule enables us to predict other people's
behaviour correctly, and this requires that it should apply to all
cases-even if in a particular instance we feel it to be unjust.
The conflict between formal justice and formal equality
before the law on the one hand, and the attempts to realise
various ideals of substantive justice and equality on the other,
also accounts for the widespread confusion about the concept of
"privilege" and its consequent abuse. To mention only the most
important instance of this abuse-the application of the term
privilege to property as such. It would indeed be privilege if, for
example, as has sometimes been the case in the past, landed prop­
erty were reserved to members of the nobility. And it is privilege
if, as is true in our time, the right to produce or sell particular
things is reserved to particular people deSignated by authority.
But to call private property as such, which all can acquire under
I It is therefore not altogether false when the legal theorist of National­
Socialism, Carl Schmitt, opposes to the liberal Rechtsstaat (Le. the Rule of Law)
the national-socialist ideal of the gerechteStaat (the just state)-only that the sort
of justice which is opposed to formal justice necessarily implies discrimination
between persons.84 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
the same rules, a privilege, because only some succeed in
acquiring it, is depriving the word privilege of its meaning.
The unpredictability of the particular effects, which is the
distinguishing characteristic of the formal laws of a liberal sys­
tem, is also important because it helps us to clear up another
confusion about the nature of this system: the belief that its
characteristic attitude is inaction of the state. The question
whether the state should or should not "act" or "interfere"
poses an altogether false alternative, and the term laissez-faireis a
highly ambiguous and misleading description of the principles
on which a liberal policy is based. Of course, every state must act
and every action of the state interferes with something or other.
But that is not the point. The important question is whether the
individual can foresee the action of the state and make use of this
knowledge as a datum in forming his own plans, with the result
that the state cannot control the use made of its machinery, and
that the individual knows precisely how far he will be protected
against interference from others, or whether the state is in a
position to frustrate individual efforts. The state controlling
weights and measures (or preventing fraud and deception in any
other way) is certainly acting, while the state permitting the use
of violence, for example, by strike pickets, is inactive. Yet it is in
the first case that the state observes liberal prinCiples and in the
second that it does not. Similarly with respect to most of the
general and permanent rules which the state may establish with
regard to production, such as building regulations or factory
laws: these may be wise or unwise in the particular instance, but
they do not conflict with liberal principles so long as they are
intended to be permanent and are not used to favour or harm
particular people. It is true that in these instances there will,
apart from the long-run effects which cannot be predicted,
also be short-run effects on particular people which may be
clearly known. But with this kind of laws the short-run effects
are in general not (or at least ought not to be) the gUidingP LA N N I N G AND THE RU LEO F LA W 85
consideration. As these immediate and predictable effects
become more important compared with the long-run effects, we
approach the border-line where the distinction, however, clear
in principle, becomes blurred in practice.
* * * * *
The Rule of Law was consciously evolved only during the liberal
age and is one of its greatest achievements, not only as a safe­
guard but as the legal embodiment of freedom. As Immanuel
Kant put it (and Voltaire expressed it before him in very much
the same terms), "Man is free if he needs to obey no person but
solely the laws". As a vague ideal it has, however, existed at least
since Roman times, and during the last few centuries it has never
been as seriously threatened as it is to-day. The idea that there is
no limit to the powers of the legislator is in part a result of
popular sovereignty and democratic government. It has been
strengthened by the belief that so long as all actions of the state
are duly authorised by legislation, the Rule of Law will be pre­
served. But this is completely to misconceive the meaning of the
Rule of Law. This rule has little to do with the question whether
all actions of government are legal in the juridical sense. They
may well be and yet not conform to the Rule of Law. The fact that
somebody has full legal authority to act in the way he does gives
no answer to the question whether the law gives him power to
act arbitrarily or whether the law prescribes unequivocally how
he has to act. It may well be that Hitler has obtained his
unlimited powers in a strictly constitutional manner and that
whatever he does is therefore legal in the juridical sense. But
who would suggest for that reason that the Rule of Law still
prevails in Germany?
To say that in a planned society the Rule of Law cannot hold is,
therefore, not to say that the actions of the government will not
be legal or that such a society will necessarily be lawless. It
means only that the use of the government's coercive powers86 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
will no longer be limited and determined by pre-established
rules. The law can, and to make a central direction of economic
activity possibly must, legalise what to all intents and purposes
remains arbitrary action. If the law says that such a Board or
Authority may do what it pleases, anything that Board or Author­
ity does is legal-but its actions are certainly not subject to
the Rule of Law. By giving the government unlimited powers the
most arbitrary rule can be made legal: and in this way a
democracy may set up the most complete despotism imaginable. 1
If, however, the law is to enable authorities to direct economic
life, it must give them powers to make and enforce decisions in
circumstances which cannot be foreseen and on principles
which cannot be stated in generic form. The consequence is that
as planning extends, the delegation of legislative powers to
divers Boards and Authorities becomes increasingly common.
When before the last war, in a case to which the late Lord Hewart
has recently drawn attention, Mr. Justice Darling said "that Par­
liament had enacted only last year that the Board of Agriculture
in acting as they did should be no more impeachable than Par­
liament itself", this was still a rare thing. It has since become an
almost daily occurrence. Constantly the broadest powers are con­
ferred on new authorities which, without being bound by fixed
1 The conflict is thus not, as it has often been misconceived in nineteenth­
century discussions, one between liberty and law. As John Locke had already
made clear, there can be no liberty without law. The conflict is between differ­
ent kinds of law, law so different that it should hardly be called by the same
name: one is the law of the Rule of Law, general principles laid down before­
hand, the "rules of the game" which enable individuals to foresee how the
coercive apparatus of the state will be used, or what he and his fellow-citizens
will be allowed to do, or lnade to do, in stated circumstances. The other kind of
law gives in effect the authority power to do what it thinks fit to do. Thus the
Rule of Law could clearly not be preserved in a democracy that undertook to
decide every conflict of interests not according to rules previously laid down,
but "on its merits".P LA N N I N G AND THE RU LEO F LA W 87
rules, have almost unlimited discretion in regulating this or that
activity of the people.
The Rule of Law thus implies limits to the scope of legislation:
it restricts it to the kind of general rules known as formal law,
and excludes legislation either directly aimed at particular
people, or at enabling anybody to use the coercive power of the
state for the purpose of such discrimination. It means, not that
everything is regulated by law, but, on the contrary, that the
coercive power of the state can be used only in cases defined in
advance by the law and in such a way that it can be foreseen how
it will be used. A particular enactment can thus infringe the Rule
of Law. Anyone ready to deny this would have to contend that
whether the Rule of Law prevails to-day in Germany, Italy, or
Russia, depends on whether the dictators have obtained their
absolute power by constitutional means. 1
* * * * *
I Another illustration of an infringement of the Rule of Law by legislation is the
case of the bill of attainder, familiar in the history of this country. The form
which the Rule of Law takes in criminal law is usually expressed by the Latin
tag nulla poena sine lege-no punishment without a law expressly prescribing it.
The essence of this rule is that the law must have existed as a general rule before
the individual case arose to which it is to be applied. Nobody would argue that,
when in a famous case in Henry VIII's reign Parliament resolved with respect to
the Bishop of Rochester's cook "that the said Richard Rose shall be boiled to
death without having the advantage of his clergy", this act was performed
under the Rule of Law. But while the Rule of Law had become an essential part
of criminal procedure in all liberal countries, it cannot be preserved in totali­
tarian regimes. There, as E. B. Ashton has well expressed it, the liberal maxim is
replaced by the principles nullum crimen sine poena-no "crime" must remain
without punishment, whether the law expliCitly provides for it or not. "The
rights of the state do not end with punishing law breakers. The community is
entitled to whatever may seem necessary to the protection of its interests-of
which observance of the law, as it stands, is only one of the more elementary
requirements" (E. B. Ashton, The Fascist,His State and Mind, 193 7, p. 11 9). What is
an infringement of "the interests of the community" is, of course, decided by
the authorities.88 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
Whether, as in some countries, the main applications of the Rule
of Law are laid down in a Bill of Rights or a Constitutional Code,
or whether the principle is merely a firmly established tradition,
matters comparatively little. But it will readily be seen that
whatever form it takes, any such recognised limitations of the
powers of legislation imply the recognition of the inalienable
right of the individual, inviolable rights of man.
It is pathetic, but characteristic of the muddle into which
many of our intellectuals have been led by the conflicting ideals
in which they believe, that a leading advocate of the most com­
prehensive central planning like Mr. H. G. Wells should at the
same time write an ardent defence of the Rights of Man. The
individual rights which Mr. Wells hopes to preserve would
inevitably obstruct the planning which he desires. To some
extent he seems to realise the dilemma, and we find therefore the
provisions of his proposed "Declaration of the Rights of Man" so
hedged about with qualifications that they lose all significance.
While, for instance, his Declaration proclaims that every man
"shall have the right to buy and sell without any discriminatory
restrictions anything which may be lawfully bought and sold",
which is admirable, he immediately proceeds to make the whole
provision nugatory by adding that it applies only to buying and
selling "in such quantities and with such reservations as are
compatible with the common welfare". But since, of course, all
restrictions ever imposed upon buying or selling anything are
supposed to be necessary in the interest of the "common wel­
fare", there is really no restriction which this clause effectively
prevents, and no right of the individual that is safeguarded by it.
Or, to take another basic clause, the Declaration states that every
man "may engage in any lawful occupation" and that "he is
entitled to paid employment and to a free choice whenever there
is any variety of employment open to him". It is not stated,
however, who is to decide whether a particular employment is
"open" to a particular person, and the added provision that "hePLANNING AND THE RULE OF LAW 89
may suggest employment for himself and have his claim publicly
considered, accepted or dismissed" shows that Mr. Wells is
thinking in terms of an authority which decides whether a man
is "entitled" to a particular position-which certainly means the
opposite of free choice of occupation. And how in a planned
world "freedom of travel and migration" is to be secured when
not only the means of communication and currencies are con­
trolled, but also the location of industries planned, or how the
freedom of the press is to be safeguarded when the supply of
paper and all the channels of distribution are controlled by the
planning authority, are questions to which Mr. Wells provides as
little answer as any other planner.
In this respect much more consistency is shown by the more
numerous reformers who, ever since the beginning of the social­
ist movement, have attacked the "metaphysical" idea of indi­
vidual rights and insisted that in a rationally ordered world there
will be no individual rights but only individual duties. This,
indeed, has become the much more common attitude of our so­
called progressives, and few things are more certain to expose
one to the reproach of being a reactionary than if one protests
against a measure on the grounds that it is a violation of the
rights of the individual. Even a liberal paper like The Economistwas
a few years ago holding up to us the example of the French, of all
people, who had learnt the lesson
that democratic government no less than dictatorship must
always [sic] have plenary powers in posse, without sacrificing
their democratic and representative character. There is no
restrictive penumbra of individual rights that can never be
touched by government in administrative matters whatever
the circumstances. There is no limit to the power of ruling
which can and should be taken by a government freely chosen
by the people and can be fully and openly criticised by an
opposition.90 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
This may be inevitable in wartime when, of course, even free and
open criticism is necessarily restricted. But the "always" in the
statement quoted does not suggest that The Economistregards it as
a regrettable wartime necessity. Yet as a permanent institution
this view is certainly incompatible with the preservation of the
Rule of Law, and it leads straight to the totalitarian state. It is,
however, the view which all those who want the government to
direct economic life must hold.
How even a formal recognition of individual rights, or of the
equal rights of minorities, loses all significance in a state which
embarks on a complete control of economic life, has been amply
demonstrated by the experience of the various Central European
countries. It has been shown there that it is possible to pursue a
policy of ruthless discrimination against national minorities by
the use of recognised instruments of economic policy, without
ever infringing the letter of the statutory protection of minority
rights. This oppression by means of economic policy was greatly
facilitated by the fact that particular industries or activities were
largely in the hands of a national minority so that many a
measure aimed ostensibly against an industry or class was in
fact aimed at a national minority. But the almost boundless
possibilities for a policy of discrimination and oppression pro­
vided by such apparently innocuous principles as "government
control of the development of industries" have been amply
demonstrated to all those desirous of seeing how the political
consequences of planning appear in practice.7
ECONOM IC CONTROL AN D
TOTALITARIAN ISM
The control of the production of wealth is the control of
human life itself.
Hilaire Bel/oc.
Most planners who have seriously considered the practical
aspects of their task have little doubt that a directed economy
must be run on more or less dictatorial lines. That the complex
system of interrelated activities, if it is to be consciously directed
at all, must be directed by a single staff of experts, and that
ultimate responsibility and power must rest in the hands of a
commander-in-chief, whose actions must not be fettered by
democratic procedure, is too obvious a consequence of under­
lying ideas of central planning not to command fairly general
assent. The consolation our planners offer us is that this authori­
tarian direction will apply "only" to economic matters. One of
the most prominent American planners, Mr. Stuart Chase, assures
us, for instance, that in a planned society "political democracy92 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
can remain if it confines itself to all but economic matter". Such
assurances are usually accompanied by the suggestion that by
giving up freedom in what are, or ought to be, the less import­
ant aspects of our lives, we shall obtain greater freedom in the
pursuit of higher values. On this ground people who abhor the
idea of a political dictatorship often clamour for a dictator in
the economic field.
The arguments used appeal to our best instincts and often
attract the finest minds. If planning really did free us from the
less important cares and so made it easier to render our existence
one of plain living and high thinking, who would wish to
belittle such an ideal? If our economic activities really concerned
only the inferior or even more sordid sides of life, of course we
ought to endeavour by all means to find a way to relieve our­
selves from the excessive care for material ends, and, leaving
them to be cared for by some piece of utilitarian machinery, set
our minds free for the higher things of life.
Unfortunately the assurance people derive from this belief
that the power which is exercised over economic life is a power
over matters of secondary importance only, and which makes
them take lightly the threat to the freedom of our economic
pursuits, is altogether unwarranted. It is largely a consequence of
the erroneous belief that there are purely economic ends separ­
ate from the other ends of life. Yet, apart from the pathological
case of the miser, there is no such thing. The ultimate ends of the
activities of reasonable beings are never economic. Strictly speak­
ing there is no "economic motive" but only economic factors
conditioning our striving for other ends. What in ordinary
language is misleadingly called the "economic motive"
means merely the desire for general opportunity, the desire for
power to achieve unspecified ends. 1 If we strive for money it is
because it offers us the widest choice in enjoying the fruits of
I Cf. L. Robbins, The Economic Causes of War, 1939, Appendix.ECONOM IC CONTROL AN D TOTALITARIAN ISM 93
our efforts. Because in modern society it is through the limita­
tion of our money incomes that we are made to feel the restric­
tions which our relative poverty still imposes upon us, many
have come to hate money as the symbol of these restrictions. But
this is to mistake for the cause the medium through which a
force makes itself felt. It would be much truer to say that money
is one of the greatest instruments of freedom ever invented by
man. It is money which in existing society opens an astounding
range of choice to the poor man, a range greater than that which
not many generations ago was open to the wealthy. We shall
better understand the significance of this service of money if we
consider what it would really mean if, as so many socialists
characteristically propose, the "pecuniary motive" were largely
displaced by "non-economic incentives". If all rewards, instead
of being offered in money, were offered in the form of public
distinctions or privileges, positions of power over other men, or
better housing or better food, opportunities for travel or educa­
tion, this would merely mean that the recipient would no longer
be allowed to choose, and that, whoever fixed the reward,
determined not only its size but also the particular form in
which it should be enjoyed.
* * * * *
Once we realise that there is no separate economic motive and
that an economic gain or economic loss is merely a gain or a loss
where it is still in our power to decide which of our needs or
desires shall be affected, it is also easier to see the important
kernel of truth in the general belief that economic matters affect
only the less important ends of life, and to understand the con­
tempt in which "merely" economic considerations are often
held. In a sense this is quite justified in a market economy-but
only in such a free economy. So long as we can freely dispose
over our income and all our possessions, economic loss will
always deprive us only of what we regard as the least important94 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
of the desires we were able to satisfy. A "merely" economic loss
is thus one whose effect we can still make fall on our less
important needs, while when we say that the value of something
we have lost is much greater than its economic value, or that it
cannot even be estimated in economic terms, this means that we
must bear the loss where it falls. And similarly with an economic
gain. Economic changes, in other words, usually affect only the
fringe, the "margin", of our needs. There are many things which
are more important than anything which economic gains or
losses are likely to affect, which for us stand high above the
amenities and even above many of the necessities of life which
are affected by the economic ups and downs. Compared with
them, the "filthy lucre" , the question whether we are economic­
ally somewhat worse or better off, seems of little importance.
This makes many people believe that anything which, like
economic planning, affects only our economic interests, cannot
seriously interfere with the more basic values of life.
This, however, is an erroneous conclusion. Economic values
are less important to us than many things precisely because in
economic matters we are free to decide what to us is more, and
what less, important. Or, as we might say, because in the present
society it is we who have to solve the economic problems of our
lives. To be controlled in our economic pursuits means to be
always controlled unless we declare our specific purpose. Or,
since when we declare our specific purpose we shall also have to
get it approved, we should really be controlled in everything.
The question raised by economic planning is, therefore, not
merely whether we shall be able to satisfy what we regard as our
more or less important needs in the way we prefer. It is whether
it shall be we who decide what is more, and what is less, import­
ant for us, or whether this is to be decided by the planner.
Economic planning would not affect merely those of our mar­
ginal needs that we have in mind when we speak contemptu­
ously about the merely economic. It would, in effect, mean thatECONOM IC CONTROL AN D TOTALITARIAN ISM 95
we as individuals should no longer be allowed to decide what
we regard as marginal.
The authority directing all economic activity would control
not merely the part of our lives which is concerned with inferior
things; it would control the allocation of the limited means for
all our ends. And whoever controls all economic activity controls
the means for all our ends, and must therefore decide which are
to be satisfied and which not. This is really the crux of the matter.
Economic control is not merely control of a sector of human
life which can be separated from the rest; it is the control of
the means for all our ends. And whoever has sole control of the
means must also determine which ends are to be served, which
values are to be rated higher and which lower, in short, what
men should believe and strive for. Central planning means that
the economic problem is to be solved by the community instead
of by the individual; but this involves that it must also be the
community, or rather its representatives, who must decide
the relative importance of the different needs.
The so-called economic freedom which the planners promise
us means precisely that we are to be relieved of the necessity of
solving our own economic problems and that the bitter choices
which this often involves are to be made for us. Since under
modern conditions we are for almost everything dependent on
means which our fellow men provide, economic planning
would involve direction of almost the whole of our life. There is
hardly an aspect of it, from our primary needs to our relations
with our family and friends, from the nature of our work to the
use of our leisure, over which the planner would not exercise his
"conscious control". 1
* * * * *
1 The extent of the control over all life that economic control confers is
nowhere better illustrated than in the field of foreign exchanges. Nothing
would at first seem to affect private life less than a state control of the dealings
in foreign exchange, and most people will regard its introduction with96 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
The power of the planner over our private lives would be no less
complete if he chose not to exercise it by direct control of our
cons,:!mption. Although a planned society would probably to
some extent employ rationing and similar devices, the power of
the planner over our private lives does not depend on this, and
would be hardly less effective if the consumer were nominally
free to spend his income as he pleased. The source of this power
over all consumption which in a planned society the authority
would possess would be their control over production.
Our freedom of choice in a competitive society rests on the
fact that, if one person refuses to satisfy our wishes we can turn
to another. But if we face a monopolist we are at his mercy. And
an authority directing the whole economic system would be the
most powerful monopolist conceivable. While we need probably
not be afraid that such an authority would exploit this power in
the manner in which a private monopolist would do so, while
its purpose would presumably not be the extortion of maximum
financial gain, it would have complete power to decide what we
are to be given and on what terms. It would not only decide
what commodities and services were to be available, and in what
quantities; it would be able to direct their distribution between
districts and groups and could, if it wished, discriminate
between persons to any degree it liked. If we remember why
planning is advocated by most people, can there be much
complete indifference. Yet the experience of most continental countries has
taught thoughtful people to regard this step as the decisive advance on the path
to totalitarianism and the suppression of individual liberty. It is in fact the
complete delivery of the individual to the tyranny of the state, the final sup­
pression of all means of escape-not merely for the rich, but for everybody.
Once the individual is no longer free to travel, no longer free to buy foreign
books or journals, once all the means of foreign contact can be restricted to
those of whom official opinion approves or for whom it is regarded as neces­
sary, the effective control of opinion is much greater than that ever exercised
by any of the absolutist governments of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries.ECONOMIC CONTROL AND TOTALITARIANISM 97
doubt that this power would be used for the ends of which the
authority approves and to prevent the pursuits of ends which
it disapproves ?
The power conferred by the control of production and prices
is almost unlimited. In a competitive society the prices we have
to pay for a thing, the rate at which we can get one thing for
another, depend on the quantities of other things of which, by
taking one, we deprive the other members of society. This price
is not determined by the conscious will of anybody. And if one
way of achieving our ends proves too expensive for us, we are
free to try other ways. The obstacles in our path are not due to
somebody disapproving of our ends, but to the fact that the same
means are also wanted elsewhere. In a directed economy, where
the authority watches over the ends pursued, it is certain that it
would use its powers to assist some ends and to prevent the
realisation of others. Not our own view, but somebody else's, of
what we ought to like or dislike would determine what we
should get. And since the authority would have the power to
thwart any efforts to elude its guidance, it would control what
we consume almost as effectively as if it directly told us how to
spend our income.
* * * * *
Not only in our capacity as consumers, however, and not even
mainly in that capacity, would the will of the authority shape
and "guide" our daily lives. It would do so even more in our
position as producers. These two aspects of our lives cannot be
separated; and as for most of us the time we spend at our work is
a large part of our whole lives, and as our job usually also deter­
mines the place where and the people among whom we live,
some freedom in choosing our work is, probably, even more
important for our happiness than freedom to spend our income
during the hours of leisure.
No doubt it is true that even in the best of worlds this freedom98 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
will be very limited. Few people have ever an abundance of
choice of occupation. But what matters is that we have some
choice, that we are not absolutely tied to a particular job which
has been chosen for us, or which we may have chosen in the past,
and that if one position becomes quite intolerable, or if we set
our heart on another, there is almost always a way for the able,
some sacrifice at the price of which he may achieve his goal.
Nothing makes conditions more unbearable than the knowledge
that no effort of ours can change them; and even if we should
never have the strength of mind to make the necessary sacrifice,
the knowledge that we could escape if we only strove hard
enough makes many otherwise intolerable positions bearable.
This is not to say that in this respect all is for the best in our
present world, or has been so in the most liberal past, and that
there is not much that could be done to improve the opportun­
ities of choice open to the people. Here as elsewhere the state can
do a great deal to help the spreading of knowledge and informa­
tion and to assist mobility. But the point is that the kind of state
action which really would increase opportunity is almost pre­
cisely the opposite of the "planning" which is now generally
advocated and practised. Most planners, it is true, promise that in
the new planned world free choice of occupation will be scrupu­
lously preserved or even increased. But there they promise more
than they can possibly fulfil. If they want to plan they must
control the entry into the different trades and occupations, or
the terms of remuneration, or both. In almost all known
instances of planning the establishment of such controls and
restrictions was among the first measures taken. If such control
were universally practised and exercised by a single planning
authority, one needs little imagination to see what would
become of the "free choice of occupation" promised. The "free­
dom of choice" would be purely fictitious, a mere promise
to practise no discrimination where in the nature of the case
discrimination must be practised, and where all one couldECONOM IC CONTROL AN 0 TOTALITARIAN ISM 99
hope would be that the selection would be made on what the
authority believed to be objective grounds.
There would be little difference if the planning authority
confined itself to fixing the terms of employment and tried to
regulate numbers by adjusting these terms. By prescribing the
remuneration it would no less effectively bar groups of people
from entering many trades than by specifically excluding them.
A rather plain girl who badly wants to become a saleswoman, a
weakly boy who has set his heart on a job where his weakness
handicaps him, as well as in general the apparently less able or
less suitable are not necessarily excluded in a competitive soci­
ety; if they value the position sufficiently, they will frequently be
able to get a start by a financial sacrifice and will later make good
through qualities which at first are not so obvious. But when
the authority fixes the remuneration for a whole category and
the selection among the candidates is made by an objective
test, the strength of their desire for the job will count for very
little. The person whose qualifications are not of the standard
type, or whose temperament is not of the ordinary kind, will no
longer be able to come to special arrangements with an
employer whose dispositions will fit in with his special needs:
the person who prefers irregular hours or even a happy-go­
lucky existence with a small and perhaps uncertain income to a
regular routine will no longer have the choice. Conditions will
be without exception what in some measure they inevitably are
in a large organisation-or rather worse, because there will be
no possibility of escape. We shall no longer be free to be rational
or efficient only when and where we think it worth while, we
shall all have to conform to the standards which the planning
authority must fix in order to simplify its task. To make this
immense task manageable it will have to reduce the diversity of
human capacities and inclinations to a few categories of readily
interchangeable units and deliberately to disregard minor per­
sonal differences. Although the professed aim of planning would100 THE R0 AD TO S E R FDO M
be that man should cease to be a mere means, in fact-since it
would be impossible to take account in the plan of individual
likes and dislikes-the individual would more than ever become
a mere means, to be used by the authority in the service of such
abstractions as the "social welfare" or the "good of the
community" .
* * * * *
That in a competitive society most things can be had at a price­
though it is often a cruelly high price we have to pay, is a fact the
importance of which can hardly be overrated. The alternative is
not, however, complete freedom of choice, but orders and pro­
hibitions which must be obeyed and, in the last resort, the
favour of the mighty.
It is significant of the confusion prevailing on all these sub­
jects that it should have become a cause for reproach that in a
competitive society almost everything can be had at a price. If
the people who protest against the higher values of life being
brought into the "cash nexus" that we should not be allowed to
sacrifice our lesser needs in order to preserve the higher values,
and that the choice should be made for us, this demand must be
regarded as rather peculiar and scarcely testifies to great respect
for the dignity of the individual. That life and health, beauty and
virtue, honour and peace of mind, can often be preserved only at
considerable material cost, and that somebody must make the
choice, is as undeniable as that we all are sometimes not pre­
pared to make the material sacrifices necessary to protect those
higher values against all injury. To take only one example: we
could, of course, reduce casualties by motor accidents to zero if
we were willing to bear the cost-if in no other way-by abol­
ishing motor-cars. And the same is true of thousands of other
instances in which we are constantly risking life and health and
all the fine values of the spirit, of ourselves and of our fellow
men, to further what we at the same time contemptuouslyECONOMIC CONTROL AND TOTALITARIANISM 101
describe as our material comfort. Nor can it be otherwise since
all our ends compete for the same means; and we could not
strive for anything but these absolute values if they were on no
account to be endangered.
That people should wish to be relieved of the bitter choice
which hard facts often impose upon them is not surprising. But
few want to be relieved through the choice being made for them
by others. People just wish that the choice should not be neces­
sary at all. And they are only too ready to believe that the choice
is not really necessary, that it is imposed upon them merely by
the particular economic system under which we live. What they
resent is in truth that there is an economic problem.
In their wishful belief that there is really no longer an
economic problem people have been confirmed by irrespon­
sible talk about "potential plenty" -which, if it were a fact,
would indeed mean that there is no economic problem which
makes the choice inevitable. But although this snare has served
socialist propaganda under various names as long as socialism
has existed, it is still as palpably untrue as it was when it was
first used over a hundred years ago. In all this time not one of
the many people who have used it has produced a workable
plan of how production could be increased so as to abolish
even in Western Europe what we regard as poverty-not to
speak of the world as a whole. The reader may take it that
whoever talks about potential plenty is either dishonest or
does not know what he is talking about. 1 Yet it is this false
I To justify these strong words the follOwing conclusions may be quoted at
which Mr. Colin Clark, one of the best known among the younger economic
statisticians, and a man of undoubted progressive views and a strictly scientific
outlook, has arrived in his Conditions of Economic Progress (1 940, pp. 3-4): The
"oft-repeated phrases about poverty in the midst of plenty, and the problems
of production having already been solved if only we understood the problem
of distribution, turn out to be the most untruthful of all modern cliches....
The under-utilisation of productive capacity is a question of considerable102 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
hope as much as anything which drives us along the road to
planning.
While the popular movement still profits by this false belief,
the claim that a planned economy would produce a substantially
larger output than the competitive system is being progressively
abandoned by most students of the problem. Even a good many
economists with socialist views who have seriously studied the
problems of central planning are now content to hope that a
planned society will equal the efficiency of a competitive system;
they advocate planning no longer because of its superior
productivity but because it will enable us to secure a more just
and equitable distribution of wealth. This is, indeed, the only
argument for planning which can be seriously pressed. It is
indisputable that if we want to secure a distribution of wealth
which conforms to some predetermined standard, if we want
consciously to decide who is to have what, we must plan the
whole economic system. But the question remains whether the
price we should have to pay for the realisation of somebody's
ideal of justice is not bound to be more discontent and more
oppression than was ever caused by the much abused free play of
economic forces.
* * * * *
We should be seriously deceiving ourselves if for these
apprehensions we sought comfort in the consideration that the
importance only in the U.S.A., though in certain years also it has been of some
importance in Great Britain, Germany and France, but for most of the world it
is entirely subsidiary to the more important fact that, with productive resources
fully employed, they can produce so little. The age of plenty will still be a long
while in coming .... If preventable unemployment were eliminated through­
out the trade cycle, this would mean a distinct improvement in the standard of
living of the population of the U.S.A.,but from the standpoint of the world as a
whole it would only make a small contribution towards the much greater
problem of raising the real income of the bulk of the world population to
anything like a civilised standard."ECONOMIC CONTROL AND TOTALITARIANISM 103
adoption of central planning would merely mean a return, after
a brief spell of a free economy, to the ties and regulations which
have governed economic activity through most ages, and that,
therefore, the infringements of personal liberty need not be
greater than they were before the age of laissez-faire. This is a
dangerous illusion. Even during the periods of European history
when the regimentation of economic life went furthest, it
amounted to little more than the creation of a general and semi­
permanent framework of rules within which the individual pre­
served a wide free sphere. The apparatus of control then available
would not have been adequate to impose more than very general
directions. And even where the control was most complete it
extended only to those activities of a person through which he
took part in the social division of labour. In the much wider
sphere in which he then still lived on his own products he was
free to act as he chose.
The situation is now entirely different. During the liberal era
the progressive division of labour has created a situation where
almost everyone of our activities is part of a social process. This
is a development which we cannot reverse since it is only
because of it that we can maintain the vastly increased popula­
tion at anything like present standards. But, in consequence, the
substitution of central planning for competition would require
central direction of a much greater part of our lives than was
ever attempted before. It could not stop at what we regard as our
economic activities, because we are now for almost every part of
our lives dependent on somebody else's economic activities. 1
The passion for the "collective satisfaction of our needs", with
I It is no accident that in the totalitarian countries, be it Russia or Germany or
Italy, the question of how to organise the people's leisure should have become
a problem of planning. The Germans have even invented for this problem the
horrible and self-contradictory name of Freizeitgestaltung(literally: the shaping of
the use made of the people's free time) as if it were still, "free time" when it
has to be spent in the way ordained by authority.104 THE R0 AD TO S E R FDO M
which our socialists have so well prepared the way for totali­
tarianism, and which wants us to take our pleasures as well as
our necessities at the appointed time and in the prescribed form,
is, of course, partly intended as a means of political education.
But it is also the result of the exigencies of planning, which
consists essentially in depriving us of choice, in order to give us
whatever fits best into the plan and that at a time determined by
the plan.
It is often said that political freedom is meaningless without
economic freedom. This is true enough, but in a sense almost
opposite from that in which the phrase is used by our planners.
The economic freedom which is the prerequisite of any other
freedom cannot be the freedom from economic care which the
socialists promise us and which can be obtained only by reliev­
ing the individual at the same time of the necessity and of the
power of choice; it must be the freedom of our economic activ­
ity which, with the right of choice, inevitably also carries the
risk and the responsibility of that right.8
WHO, WHOM?
The finest opportunity ever given to the world was thrown
away because the passion for equality made vain the hope for
freedom.
Lord Acton.
It is significant that one of the commonest objections to com­
petition is that it is "blind". It is not irrelevant to recall that to
the ancients blindness was an attribute of their deity of justice.
Although competition and justice may have little else in
common, it is as much a commendation of competition as of
justice that it is no respecter of persons. That it is impossible
to foretell who will be the lucky ones or whom disaster will
strike, that rewards and penalties are not shared out according
to somebody's views about the merits or demerits of different
people, but depend on their capacity and their luck, is as
important as that in framing legal rules we should not be able
to predict which particular person will gain and which will
lose by their application. And this is none the less true
because in competition chance and good luck are often as106 THE R0 AD TO S E R FDO M
important as skill and foresight in determining the fate of
different people.
The choice open to us is not between a system in which
everybody will get what he deserves according to some absolute
and universal standard of right, and one where the individual
shares are determined partly by accident or good or ill chance,
but between a system where it is the will of a few persons that
decides who is to get what, and one where it depends at least
partly on the ability and enterprise of the people concerned and
partly on unforeseeable circumstances. This is no less relevant
because in a system of free enterprise chances are not equal,
since such a system is necessarily based on private property and
(though perhaps not with the same necessity) on inheritance,
with the differences in opportunity which these create. There is
indeed a strong case for reducing this inequality of opportunity
as far as congenital differences permit and as it is possible to do
so without destroying the impersonal character of the process by
which everybody has to take his chance and no person's view
about what is right and desirable overrules that of others.
The fact that the opportunities open to the poor in a competi­
tive society are much more restricted than those open to the rich
does not make it less true that in such a society the poor are
much more free than a person commanding much greater
material comfort in a different type of society. Although under
competition the probability that a man who starts poor will
reach great wealth is much smaller than is true of the man who
has inherited property, it is not only possible for the former, but
the competitive system is the only one where it depends solely
on him and not on the favours of the mighty, and where nobody
can prevent a man from attempting to achieve this result. It is
only because we have forgotten what unfreedom means that we
often overlook the patent fact that in every real sense a badly paid
unskilled worker in this country has more freedom to shape his
life than many a small entrepreneur in Germany or a muchWHO, WHOM? 107
better paid engineer or manager in Russia. Whether it is a
question of changing his job or the place where he lives, of
professing certain views or of spending his leisure in a particular
manner, although sometimes the price he may have to pay for
following his inclinations may be high, and to many appear too
high, there are no absolute impediments, no dangers to bodily
security and freedom that confine him by brute force to the task
and the environment to which a superior has assigned him.
That the ideal of justice of most socialists would be satisfied if
merely private income from property were abolished and the
differences between the earned incomes of different people
remained what they are now, is true. 1 What these people forget is
that in transferring all property in the means of production to
the state they put the state in a position whereby its action must
in effect decide all other incomes. The power thus given to the
state and the demand that the state should use it to "plan" means
nothing else than that it should use it in full awareness of all
these effects.
To believe that the power which is thus conferred on the state
is merely transferred to it from others is erroneous. It is a power
1 It is probable that we habitually overestimate the extent to which inequality
of incomes is mainly caused by income derived from property, and therefore
the extent to which the major inequalities would be abolished by abolishing
income from property. What little information we have about the distribution
of incomes in Soviet Russia does not suggest that the inequalities are there
substantially smaller than in a capitalist society. Max Eastman (The End of Socialism
in Russia, 1937, pp. 30-4) gives some information from official Russian sources
which suggest that the difference between the highest and the lowest salaries
paid in Russia is of the same order of magnitude (about 50 to 1) as in the
United States; and Leon Trotsky, according to an article quoted by James
Burnham (The Managerial Revolution, 1941, p. 43), estimated as late as 1939 that
"the upper 11 or 12 per cent. of the Soviet population now receives approxi­
mately SOper cent. of the national income. This differentiation is sharper than
in the United States, where the upper 10 per cent. of the population receives
approximately 35 per cent. of the national income. tt108 THE R0 AD TO S E R FDO M
which is newly created and which in a competItIve society
nobody possesses. So long as property is divided among many
owners, none of them acting independently has exclusive power
to determine the income and position of particular people­
nobody is tied to him except by the fact that he may offer better
terms than anybody else.
What our generation has forgotten is that the system of pri­
vate property is the most important guarantee of freedom, not
only for those who own property, but scarcely less for those who
do not. It is only because the control of the means of production
is divided among many people acting independently that
nobody has complete power over us, that we as individuals can
decide what to do with ourselves. If all the means of production
were vested in a single hand, whether it be nominally that of
"society" as a whole, or that of a dictator, whoever exercises this
control has complete power over us. Who can seriously doubt
that a member of a small racial or religious minority will be
freer with no property so long as fellow members of his com­
munity have property and are therefore able to employ him, than
he would be if private property were abolished and he became
owner of a nominal share in the communal property. Or that the
power which a multiple millionaire, who may be my neighbour
and perhaps my employer, has over me is very much less than
that which the smallest fonctionaire possesses who wields the
coercive power of the state and on whose discretion it depends
whether and how I am to be allowed to live or to work? And
who will deny that a world in which the wealthy are powerful is
still a better world than one in which only the already powerful
can acquire wealth?
It is pathetic, yet at the same time encouraging, to find as
prominent an old communist as Mr. Max Eastman rediscovering
this truth:
It seems obvious to me now [he writes in a recent article]-WHO, WHO M? 109
though I have been slow, I must say, in coming to the
conclusion-that the institution of private property is one of
the main things that have given man that limited amount of
free and equalness that Marx hoped to render infinite by abol­
ishing this institution. Strangely enough Marx was the first to
see this. He is the one who informed us, looking backwards,
that the evolution of private capitalism with its free market had
been a precondition for the evolution of all our democratic
freedoms. It never occurred to him, looking forward, that if
this was so, these other freedoms might disappear with the
abolition of the free market.
1
It is sometimes said, in answer to such apprehensions, that
there is no reason why the planner should determine the
incomes of individuals. The social and political difficulties
involved in deciding the shares of different people in the
national income are so obvious that even the most inveterate
planner may well hesitate before he charges any authority with
this task. Probably everybody who realises what it involves
would prefer to confine planning to production, to use it only to
secure a "rational organisation of industry", leaving the distribu­
tion of incomes as far as possible to impersonal forces. Although
it is impossible to direct industry without exercising some influ­
ence on distribution, and although no planner will wish to leave
distribution entirely to the forces of the market, they would
pro bably all prefer to confine themselves to seeing that this
distribution conforms to certain general rules of equity and
fairness, that extreme inequalities are avoided, and that the rela­
tion between the remuneration of the major classes is just,
without undertaking the responsibility for the position of
particular people within their class, or for the gradations and
differentiations between smaller groups and individuals.
1 Max Eastman in The Reader's Digest, July 1941 , p. 39.110 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
We have already seen that the close interdependence of all
economic phenomena makes it difficult to stop planning just
where we wish, and that, once the free working of the market is
impeded beyond a certain degree, the planner will be forced to
extend his controls till they become all-comprehensive. These
economic considerations, which explain why it is impossible to
stop deliberate control just where we should wish, are strongly
reinforced by certain social or political tendencies whose
strength makes itself increasingly felt as planning extends.
Once it becomes increasingly true, and is generally recog­
nised, that the position of the individual is determined not by
impersonal forces, not as a result of the competitive effort of
many, but by the deliberate decision of authority, the attitude of
the people towards their position in the social order necessarily
changes. There will always exist inequalities which will appear
unjust to those who suffer from them, disappointments which
will appear unmerited, and strokes of misfortune which those
hit have not deserved. But when these things occur in a society
which is consciously directed, the way in which people will
react will be very different from what it is when they are
nobody's conscious choice. Inequality is undoubtedly more
readily borne, and affects the dignity of the person much less, if
it is determined by impersonal forces, than when it is due to
deSign. In a competitive society it is no slight to a person, no
offence to his dignity, to be told by any particular firm that it has
no need for his services, or that it cannot offer him a better job. It
is true that in periods of prolonged mass-unemployment the
effect on many may be very similar. But there are other and
better methods to prevent that scourge than central direction.
But the unemployment or the loss of income which will always
affect some in any society is certainly less degrading if it is the
result of misfortune and not deliberately imposed by authority.
However bitter the experience, it would be very much worse in a
planned society. There individuals will have to decide notWHO, WHOM? 111
whether a person is needed for a particular job, but whether he
is of use for anything, and how useful he is. His position in life
must be assigned to him by somebody else.
While people will submit to suffering which may hit anyone,
they will not so easily submit to suffering which is the result of
the decision of authority. It may be bad to be just a cog in an
impersonal machine; but it is infinitely worse if we can no
longer leave it, if we are tied to our place and to the superiors
who have been chosen for us. Dissatisfaction of everybody with
his lot will inevitably grow with the consciousness that it is the
result of deliberate human decision.
Once government has embarked upon planning for the sake
of justice, it cannot refuse responsibility for anybody's fate or
position. In a planned society, we shall all know that we are
better or worse off than others, not because of circumstances
which nobody controls, and which it is impossible to foresee
with certainty, but because some authority wills it. And all our
efforts directed towards improving our position will have to
aim, not at foreseeing and preparing as well as we can for the
circumstances over which we have no control, but at influencing
in our favour the authority which has all the power. The night­
mare of English nineteenth-century political thinkers: the state
in which "no avenue to wealth and honour would exist save
through the government" 1 would be realised in a completeness
which they never imagined-though familiar enough in some
countries which have since passed to totalitarianism.
* * * * *
As soon as the state takes upon itself the task of planning the
whole economic life, the problem of the due station of the dif­
ferent individuals and groups must indeed inevitably become
the central political problem. As the coercive power of the state
1 The actual words are those of the young Disraeli.112 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
will alone decide who is to have what, the only power worth
having will be a share in the exercise of this directing power.
There will be no economic or social questions that would not be
political questions in the sense that their solution will depend
exclusively on who wields the coercive power, on whose are the
views that will prevail on all occasions.
I believe it was Lenin himself who introduced to Russia the
famous phrase "who, whom?"-during the early years of Soviet
rule the byword in which the people summed up the universal
problem of a socialist society. 1 Who plans whom, who directs
and dominates whom, who assigns to other people their station
in life, and who is to have his due allotted by others? These
become necessarily the central issues to be decided solely by the
supreme power.
More recently an American student of politics has enlarged
upon Lenin's phrase and asserted that the problem of all gov­
ernment is "who gets what, when, and how?" In a way this is
not untrue. That all government affects the relative position of
different people and that there is under any system scarcely an
aspect of our lives which may not be affected by government
action, is certainly true. In so far as government does anything at
all, its action will always have some effect on "who gets what,
when, and how" .
There are, however, two fundamental distinctions to be made.
Firstly, particular measures may be taken without the knowledge
of how they will affect particular individuals, and without
aiming at such particular effects. This point we have already
discussed. Secondly, it is the extent of the activities of the
government which decides whether everything that any person
gets at any time depends on the government, or whether its
influence is confined to whether some people will get some
I Cf M. Muggeridge, Winter in Moscow, 1934; A. Feiler, The Experimentof Bolshevism,
1930.WHO, WHOM? 113
things in some way at some time. Here lies the whole difference
between a free and a totalitarian system.
The contrast between a liberal and a totally planned system is
characteristically illustrated by the common complaints of Nazis
and socialists of the "artificial separations of economics and
politics" , and their equally common demand for the dominance
of politics over economics. These phrases presumably mean not
only that economic forces are now allowed to work for ends
which are not part of the policy of the government, but also that
economic power can be used independently of government
direction and for ends of which the government may not
approve. But the alternative is not merely that there would be
only one power, but that this single power, the ruling group,
should have control over all human ends, and particularly that it
should have complete power over the position of each individual
in society.
* * * * *
That a government which undertakes to direct economic activity
will have to use its power to realise somebody's ideal of distribu­
tive justice is certain. But how can and how will it use that
power? By what principles will it or ought it to be guided? Is
there a definite answer to the innumerable questions of relative
merits that will arise and which will have to be solved delib­
erately? Is there a scale of values on which reasonable people can
be expected to agree, which would justify a new hierarchical
order of society, and is likely to satisfy the demands for justice?
There is only one general principle, one simple rule which
would indeed provide a definite answer to all these questions:
equality, complete and absolute equality of all individuals in all
those points which are subject to human control. If this were
generally regarded as desirable (quite apart from the question
whether it would be practicable, i.e., whether it would provide
adequate incentives), it would give the vague idea of distributive114 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
justice a clear meaning and would give the planner definite
guidance. But nothing is further from the truth than that people
in general regard mechanical equality of this kind as desirable.
No socialist movement which aimed at complete equality has
ever gained substantial support. What socialism promised was
not an absolutely equal, but a more just and more equal distribu­
tion. Not equality in the absolute sense, but "greater equality", is
the only goal which is seriously aimed at.
Though these two ideals sound very similar, they are as differ­
ent as possible as far as our problem is concerned. While abso­
lute equality would clearly determine the planner's task, the
desire for greater equality is merely negative, no more than an
expression of dislike of the present state of affairs; and so long as
we are not prepared to say that every move in the direction
towards complete equality is desirable, it answers scarcely any of
the questions the planner will have to decide.
This is not a quibble about words. We face here a crucial issue
which the similarity of the terms used is apt to conceal. While
agreement on complete equality would answer all the problems
of merit the planner must answer, the formula of the approach to
greater equality answers practically none. Its content is hardly
more definite than the phrases "common good" or "social wel­
fare". It does not free us from the necessity of deciding in every
particular instance between the merits of particular individuals
or groups, and gives us no help in that decision. All it tells us in
effect is to take from the rich as much as we can. But when it
comes to the distribution of the spoils, the problem is the same
as if the formula of "greater equality" had never been conceived.
* * * * *
Most people find it difficult to admit that we do not possess
moral standards which would enable us to settle these
questions-if not perfectly, at least to greater general satisfaction
than is done by the competitive system. Have we not all someWHO, WHOM? 115
idea of what is a "just price", or a "fair wage"? Can we not rely
on the strong sense of fairness of the people? And even if we do
not now agree fully on what is just or fair in a particular case,
would popular ideas not soon consolidate into more definite
standards if people were given an opportunity to see their ideals
realised?
Unfortunately there is little ground for such hopes. What
standards we have are derived from the competitive regime we
have known, and would necessarily disappear soon after the dis­
appearance of competition. What we mean by a just price, or a
fair wage, is either the customary price or wage, the return
which past experience has made people expect, or the price or
wage that would exist if there were no monopolistic exploita­
tion. The only important exception to this used to be the claim
of the workers to the "full produce of their labour", to which so
much of socialist doctrine traces back. But there are few socialists
to-day who believe that in a socialist society the output of each
industry would be entirely shared by the workers of that indus­
try; for this would mean that workers in industries using a great
deal of capital would have a much larger income than those in
industries using little capital, which most socialists would regard
as very unjust. And it is now fairly generally agreed that this
particular claim was based on an erroneous interpretation of the
facts. But once the claim of the individual worker to the whole of
"his" product is disallowed, and the whole of the return from
capital is to be divided among all workers, the problem of how
to divide it raises the same basic issue.
What the "just price" of a particular commodity or the "fair"
remuneration for a particular service is, might conceivably be
determined objectively if the quantities needed were independ­
ently fixed. If these were given irrespective of cost, the planner
might try to find what price or wage is necessary to bring forth
this supply. But the planner must also decide how much is to be
produced of each kind of goods, and in so doing he determines116 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
what will be the just price or fair wage to pay. If the planner
decides that fewer architects or watch-makers are wanted and
that the need can be met by those who are willing to stay in the
trade at a lower remuneration, the "fair" wage will be lower. In
deciding the relative importance of the different ends, the plan­
ner also decides the relative importance of the different groups
and persons. As he is not supposed to treat the people merely as
a means, he must take account of these effects and consciously
balance the importance of the different ends against the effects
of his decision. This means, however, that he will necessarily
exercise direct control over the conditions of the different
people.
This applies to the relative position of individuals no less than
to that of the different occupational groups. We are in general far
too apt to think of incomes within a given trade or profession as
more or less uniform. But the differences between the incomes,
not only of the most and the least successful doctor or architect,
writer or cinema actor, boxer or jockey, but also of the more and
the less successful plumber or market gardener, grocer or tailor,
are as great as those between the propertied and the property­
less classes. And although, no doubt, there would be some
attempt at standardisation by creating categories, the necessity of
discrimination between individuals would remain the same,
whether it were exercised by fixing their individual incomes or
by allocating them to particular categories.
We need say no more about the likelihood of men in a free
society submitting to such control-or about their remaining free
if they submitted. On the whole question what John Stuart Mill
wrote nearly a hundred years ago remains equally true to-day:
A fixed rule, like that of equality, might be acquiesced in, and
so might chance, or an external necessity; but that a handful of
human beings should weigh everybody in the balance, and give
more to one and less to another at their sole pleasure andWHO, WHOM? 117
judgement, would not be borne unless from persons believed
to be more than men, and backed by supernatural terrors.
1
* * * * *
These difficulties need not lead to open clashes so long as
socialism is merely the aspiration of a limited and fairly homo­
geneous group. They come to the surface only when a socialist
policy is actually attempted with the support of the many differ­
ent groups which together compose the majority of a people.
Then it soon becomes the one burning question which of the
different sets of ideals shall be imposed upon all by making the
whole resources of the country serve it. It is because successful
planning requires the creation of a common view on the essen­
tial values that the restriction of our freedom with regard to
material things touches so directly on our spiritual freedom.
Socialists, the cultivated parents of the barbarous offspring
they have produced, traditionally hope to solve this problem by
education. But what does education mean in this respect? Surely
we have learnt that knowledge cannot create new ethical values,
that no amount of learning will lead people to hold the same
views on the moral issues which a conscious ordering of all
social relations raises. It is not rational conviction but the accept­
ance of a creed which is required to justify a particular plan.
And, indeed, socialists everywhere were the first to recognise
that the task they had set themselves required the general accept­
ance of a common Weltanschauung,of a definite set of values. It was
in these efforts to produce a mass movement supported by such
a single world view, that the socialists first created most of the
instruments of indoctrination of which Nazis and Fascists have
made such effective use.
In Germany and Italy the Nazis and Fascists did indeed not
have much to invent. The usages of the new political movements
I ]. S. Mill, Principlesof PoliticalEconomy, Bk. I, Ch. II, Para. 4.118 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
which pervaded all aspects of life had in both countries already
been introduced by the socialists. The idea of a political
party which embraces all activities of the individual from the
cradle to the grave, which claims to guide his views on every­
thing, and which delights in making all problems questions of
party-Weltanschauung,was first put into practice by the socialists.
An Austrian socialist writer, speaking of the socialist movement
of his country, reports with pride that it was its "characteristic
feature that it created special organisations for every field of
activities of workers and employees". 1 But though the Austrian
socialists may have gone further in this respect than others, the
situation was not very different elsewhere. It was not the Fascists
but the socialists who began to collect children from the tender­
est age into political organisations to make sure that they grew
up as good proletarians. It was not the Fascists but the socialists
who first thought of organising sports and games, football and
hiking, in party clubs where the members would not be infected
by other views. It was the socialists who first insisted that the
party member should distinguish himself from others by the
modes of greeting and the forms of address. It was they who by
their organisation of "cells" and devices for the permanent
supervision of private life created the prototype of the totali­
tarian party. BaHlla and Hitlerjugend,Dopolavoroand Kraft durch Freude,
political uniforms and military party formations, are all little
more than imitations of older socialist institutions. 2
* * * * *
So long as the socialist movement in a country is closely bound
up with the interests of a particular group, usually the more
highly skilled industrial workers, the problem of creating a
common view on the desirable status of the different members
I G. Wieser, Ein Staat stirbt,Oesterreich1934-1938, Paris, 1938, p. 41.
2 The political "book clubs" in this country provide a not unimportant parallel.WHO, WHOM? 119
of society is comparatively simple. The movement is immediately
concerned with the status of one particular group and its aim is
to raise that status relatively to other groups. The character of the
problem changes, however, as in the course of the progressive
advance towards socialism it becomes more and more evident to
everybody that his income and general position is determined
by the coercive apparatus of the state, that he can maintain or
improve his position only as a member of an organised group
capable of influencing or controlling the state machine in his
interest. In the tug-of-war between the various pressure groups
which arises at this stage, it is by no means necessary that the
interests of the poorest and most numerous groups should pre­
vail. Nor is it necessarily an advantage for the older socialist
parties, who avowedly represented the interests of a particular
group, to have been the first in the field, and to have designed
their whole ideology to appeal to the manual workers in indus­
try. Their very success, and their insistence on the acceptance
of the whole creed, is bound to create a powerful counter­
movement-not by the capitalists, but by the very large and
equally propertyless classes who find their relative status threat­
ened by the advance of the elite of the industrial workers.
Socialist theory and socialist tactics, even where they have not
been dominated by Marxist dogma, have been based everywhere
on the idea of a division of society into two classes with common
but mutually conflicting interests: capitalists and industrial work­
ers. Socialism counted on a rapid disappearance of the old middle
class and completely disregarded the rise of a new middle class,
the countless army of clerks and typists, administrative workers
and school teachers, tradesmen and small officials, and the lower
ranks of the professions. For a time these classes often provided
many of the leaders of the labour movement. But as it became
increasingly clear that the position of those classes was deteriorat­
ing relatively to that of the industrial workers, the ideals which
guided the latter lost much of their appeal to the others. While120 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
they were all socialists in the sense that they disliked the capitalist
system and wanted a deliberate sharing out of wealth according
to their ideas of justice, these ideas proved to be very different
from those embodied in the practice of the older socialist parties.
The means which the old socialist parties had successfully
employed to secure the support of one occupational group-the
raising of their relative economic position-cannot be used to
secure the support of all. There are bound to arise rival socialist
movements that appeal to the support of those whose relative
position is worsened. There is a great deal of truth in the often
heard statement that Fascism and National Socialism are a sort of
middle-class socialism-only that in Italy and Germany the sup­
porters of these new movements were economically hardly a
middle class any longer. It was to a large extent a revolt of a new
under-privileged class against the labour aristocracy which the
industrial labour movement had created. There can be little
doubt that no single economic factor has contributed more to
help these movements than the envy of the unsuccessful profes­
sional man, the university trained engineer or lawyer, and of the
"white collared proletariat" in general, of the engine driver or
compositor and other members of the strongest trade unions
whose income was many times theirs. Nor can there be much
doubt that in terms of money income the average member of the
rank and file of the Nazi movement in its early years was poorer
than the average trade unionist or member of the older socialist
party-a circumstance which only gained pOignancy from the
fact that the former had often seen better days and were fre­
quently still living in surroundings which were the result of this
past. The expression "class struggled d rebours", current in Italy at
the time of the rise of Fascism, did point to a very important
aspect of the movement. The conflict between the Fascist or
National-Socialist and the older socialist parties must indeed very
largely be regarded as the kind of conflict which is bound to arise
between rival socialist factions. There was no difference betweenWHO, WHOM? 121
them about the question of it being the will of the state which
should assign to each person his proper place in society. But there
were, as there always will be, most profound differences about
what are the proper places of the different classes and groups.
* * * * *
The old socialist leaders, who had always regarded their parties
as the natural spearhead of the future general movement towards
socialism, found it difficult to understand that with every exten­
sion in the use of socialist methods the resentment of large poor
classes should turn against them. But while the old socialist par­
ties, or the organised labour in particular industries, had usually
not found it unduly difficult to come to an understanding for
joint action with the employers in their particular industries,
very large classes were left out in the cold. To them, and not
without some justification, the more prosperous sections of the
labour movement seemed to belong to the exploiting rather than
to the exploited class.
1
The resentment of the lower middle class, from which Fas­
cism and National Socialism recruited so large a proportion of
their supporters, was intensified by the fact that their education
and training had in many instances made them aspire to direct­
ing positions, and that they regarded themselves as entitled to be
members of the directing class. While the younger generation,
out of that contempt for profit-making fostered by socialist
teaching, spurned independent positions which involved risk,
and flocked in ever-increasing numbers into salaried positions
which promised security, they demanded a place yielding them
the income and power to which in their opinion their training
I It is now twelve years since one of the leading European socialist intellectuals,
Hendrick de Man (who has since consistently developed further and made his
peace with the Nazis), observed that "for the first time since the beginning of
socialism, anti-capitalist resentments are turning against the socialist move­
ment" (Sozialismusund National-Faszismus,Potsdam, 1931, p. 6).122 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
entitled them. While they believed in an organised society, they
expected a place in that society very different from that which
society ruled by labour seemed to offer. They were quite ready to
take over the methods of the older socialism but intended to
employ them in the service of a different class. The movement
was able to attract all those who, while they agreed on the desir­
ability of the state controlling all economic activity, disagreed
with the ends for which the aristocracy of the industrial workers
used their political strength.
The new socialist movement started with several tactical
advantages. Labour socialism had grown in a democratic and
liberal world, adapting its tactics to it and taking over many of
the ideals of liberalism. Its protagonists still believed that the
creation of socialism as such would solve all problems. Fascism
and National-Socialism, on the other hand, grew out of the
experience of an increasingly regulated society awakening to the
fact that democratic and international socialism was aiming at
incompatible ideals. Their tactics were developed in a world
already dominated by socialist policy and the problems it creates.
They had no illusions about the possibility of a democratic solu­
tion of problems which require more agreement among people
than can reasonably be expected. They had no illusions about the
capacity of reason to decide all the questions of the relative
importance of the wants of different men or groups which plan­
ning inevitably raises, or about the formula of equality providing
an answer. They knew that the strongest group which rallied
enough supporters in favour of a new hierarchical order of soci­
ety, and which frankly promised privileges to the classes to
which it appealed, was likely to obtain the support of all those
who were disappointed because they had been promised equal­
ity but found that they had merely furthered the interest of a
particular class. Above all they were successful because they
offered a theory, or Weltanschauung,which seemed to justify the
privileges they promised to their supporters.9
SECURITY AND FREEDOM
The whole of society will have become a single office and a
single factory with equality of work and equality of pay.
~ I. Lenin, 1917.
In a country where the sole employer is the State, opposition
means death by slow starvation. The old principle: who does
not work shall not eat, has been replaced by a new one: who
does not obey shall not eat.
L. Trotsky, 1937.
Like the spurious "economic freedom", and with more justice,
economic security is often represented as an indispensable con­
dition of real liberty. In a sense this is both true and important.
Independence of mind or strength of character are rarely found
among those who cannot be confident that they will make their
way by their own effort. Yet the idea of economic security is no
less vague and ambiguous than most other terms in this field;
and because of this the general approval given to the demand for
security may become a danger to liberty. Indeed, when security
is understood in too absolute a sense, the general striving for it,124 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
far from increasing the chances of freedom, becomes the gravest
threat to it.
It will be well to contrast at the outset the two kinds of secur­
ity: the limited one, which can be achieved for all, and which is
therefore no privilege but a legitimate object of desire; and the
absolute security which in a free society cannot be achieved for
all and which ought not to be given as a privilege-except in a
few special instances such as that of the judges, where complete
independence is of paramount importance. These two kinds of
security are, first, security against severe physical privation, the
certainty of a given minimum of sustenance for all; and, sec­
ondly, the security of a given standard of life, or of the relative
position which one person or group enjoys compared with
others; or, as we may put it briefly, the security of a minimum
income and the security of the particular income a person is
thought to deserve. We shall presently see that this distinction
largely coincides with the distinction between the security
which can be provided for all outside of and supplementary to
the market system, and the security which can be provided only
for some and only by controlling or abolishing the market.
There is no reason why in a society that has reached the
general level of wealth which ours has attained, the first kind of
security should not be guaranteed to all without endangering
general freedom. There are difficult questions about the precise
standard which should thus be assured; there is particularly the
important question whether those who thus rely on the com­
munity should indefinitely enjoy all the same liberties as the
rest. 1 An incautious handling of these questions might well
cause serious and perhaps even dangerous political problems;
but there can be no doubt that some minimum of food, shelter,
I There are also serious problems of international relations which arise if mere
citizenship of a country confers the right to a standard of living higher than
elsewhere, and which ought not to be dismissed too lightly.SECURITY AND FREEDOM 125
and clothing, sufficient to preserve health and the capacity to
work, can be assured to everybody. Indeed, for a considerable
part of the population of this country this sort of security has
long been achieved.
Nor is there any reason why the state should not assist the
individuals in providing for those common hazards of life
against which, because of their uncertainty, few individuals can
make adequate provision. Where, as in the case of sickness and
accident, neither the desire to avoid such calamities nor the
efforts to overcome their consequences are as a rule weakened
by the provision of assistance, where, in short, we deal with
genuinely insurable risks, the case for the state helping to organ­
ise a comprehensive system of social insurance is very strong.
There are many points of detail where those wishing to preserve
the competitive system and those wishing to supersede it by
something different will disagree on the details of such schemes;
and it is possible under the name of social insurance to introduce
measures which tend to make competition more or less ineffect­
ive. But there is no incompatibility in principle between the state
providing greater security in this way and the preservation of
individual freedom. To the same category belongs also the
increase of security through the state rendering assistance to the
victims of such "acts of God" as earthquakes and floods. Wher­
ever communal action can mitigate disasters against which the
individual can neither attempt to guard himself, nor make provi­
sion for the consequences, such communal action should
undoubtedly be taken.
There is, finally, the supremely important problem of combat­
ing general fluctuations of economic activity and the recurrent
waves of large-scale unemployment which accompany them.
This is, of course, one of the gravest and most pressing problems
of our time. But, though its solution will require much planning
in the good sense, it does not-or at least need not-require that
special kind of planning which according to its advocates is to126 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
replace the market. Many economists hope indeed that the
ultimate remedy may be found in the field of monetary policy,
which would involve nothing incompatible even with
nineteenth-century liberalism. Others, it is true, believe that real
success can be expected only from the skilful timing of public
works undertaken on a very large scale. This might lead to much
more serious restrictions of the competitive sphere, and in
experimenting in this direction we shall have carefully to
watch our step if we are to avoid making all economic activity
progressively more dependent on the direction and volume of
government expenditure. But this is neither the only, nor, in my
opinion, the most promising way of meeting the gravest threat
to economic security. In any case, the very necessary efforts to
secure protection against these fluctuations do not lead to the
kind of planning which constitutes such a threat to our freedom.
* * * * *
The planning for security which has such an insidious effect on
liberty is that for security of a different kind. It is planning
designed to protect individuals or groups against diminutions of
their income which although in no way deserved yet in a com­
petitive society occur daily, against losses imposing severe hard­
ships having no moral justification yet inseparable from the
competitive system. This demand for security is thus another
form of the demand for a just remuneration, a remuneration
commensurate with the subjective merits and not with the
objective results of a man's efforts. This kind of security or justice
seems irreconcilable with freedom to choose one's employment.
In any system which for the distribution of men between the
different trades and occupations relies on their own choice it is
necessary that the remuneration in these trades should corre­
spond to their usefulness to the other members of society, even
if this should stand in no relation to subjective merit. Although
the results achieved will often be commensurate with efforts andSEC URI TV AND F R EEDO M 127
intentions, this cannot always be true in any form of society. It
will particularly not be true in the many instances where the
usefulness of some trade or special skill is changed by circum­
stances which could not be foreseen. We all know the tragic
plight of the highly trained man whose hard-learned skill has
suddenly lost its value because of some invention which greatly
benefits the rest of society. The history of the last hundred years
is full of instances of this kind, some of them affecting hundreds
of thousands of people at a time.
That anybody should suffer a great diminution of his income
and bitter disappointment of all his hopes through no fault of his
own, and despite hard work and exceptional skill, undoubtedly
offends our sense of justice. The demands of those who suffer in
this way, for state interference on their behalf to safeguard their
legitimate expectations, are certain to receive popular sympathy
and support. The general approval of these demands has had the
effect that governments everywhere have taken action, not
merely to protect the people so threatened from severe hardship
and privation, but to secure to them the continued receipt of
their former income and to shelter them from the vicissitudes of
the market.
1
Certainty of a given income can, however, not be given to all if
any freedom in the choice of one's occupation is to be allowed.
And if it is provided for some it becomes a privilege at the
expense of others whose security is thereby necessarily dimin­
ished. That security of an invariable income can be provided for
all only by the abolition of all freedom in the choice of one's
employment is easily shown. Yet, although such a general guar­
antee of legitimate expectation is often regarded as the ideal to
be aimed at, it is not a thing which is seriously attempted. What
I Very interesting suggestions of how these hardships might be mitigated
within a liberal society, have recently been put forward by Professor W H. Hutt
in a book, which will repay careful study (Plan for Reconstruction,1943).128 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
is constantly being done is to grant this kind of security piece­
meal, to this group and to that, with the result that for those who
are left out in the cold the insecurity constantly increases. No
wonder that in consequence the value attached to the privilege
of security constantly increases, the demand for it becomes more
and more urgent, till in the end no price, not even that of liberty,
appears too high.
* * * * *
If those whose usefulness is reduced by circumstances which
they could neither foresee nor control were to be protected
against undeserved loss, and those whose usefulness has been
increased in the same way were prevented from making an
unmerited gain, remuneration would soon cease to have any
relation to actual usefulness. It would depend on the views held
by some authority about what a person ought to have done,
what he ought to have foreseen, and how good or bad his inten­
tions were. Such decisions could not but be to a large extent
arbitrary. The application of this principle would necessarily
bring it about that people doing the same work would receive
different remuneration. The differences in remuneration would
then no longer present an adequate inducement to people to
make the changes which are socially desirable and it would not
even be possible for the individuals affected to judge whether a
particular change is worth the trouble it causes.
But if the changes in the distribution of men between differ­
ent employments, which are constantly necessary in any society,
can no longer be brought about by pecuniary "rewards" and
"penalties" (which have no necessary connection with subject­
ive merit), they must be brought about by direct orders. When a
person's income is guaranteed he can neither be allowed to stay
in his job merely because he likes it, nor to choose what
other work he would like to do. As it is not he who makes the
gain or suffers th~ loss dependent on his moving or not moving,SECURITY AND FREEDOM 129
the choice must be made for him by those who control the
distribution of the available income.
The problem of the adequate incentives which arises here is
commonly discussed as if it were a problem mainly of the will­
ingness of people to do their best. But this, although important,
is not the whole, nor even the most important, aspect of the
problem. It is not merely that if we want people to give their best
we must make it worth while for them. What is more important
is that if we want to leave them the choice, if they are to be able
to judge what they ought to do, they must be given some readily
intelligible yardstick by which to measure the social importance
of the different occupations. Even with the best will in the world
it would be impossible for anyone intelligently to choose
between various alternatives if the advantages they offered him
stood in no relation to their usefulness to society. To know
whether as the result of a change a man ought to leave a trade
and an environment which he has come to like, and exchange
it for another, it is necessary that the changed relative value
of these occupations to society should find expression in the
remunerations they offer.
The problem is, of course, even more important because in.~
the world as it is men are, in fact, not likely to give their best for
long periods unless their own interests are directly involved. At
least for great numbers some external pressure is needed if they
are to give their best. The problem of incentives in this sense is a
very real one, both in the sphere of ordinary labour and in those
of the managerial activities. The application of the engineering
technique to a whole nation-and this is what planning
means-ccraises problems of discipline which are hard to solve",
as has been well described by an American engineer with great
experience in government planning, who has clearly seen the
problem.
In order to do an engineering job, [he explains], there ought130 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
to be surrounding the work a comparatively large area of
unplanned economic action. There should be a place from
which workers can be drawn, and when a worker is fired he
should vanish from the job and from the pay-roll. In the
absence of such a free reservoir discipline cannot be main­
tained without corporal punishment, as with slave labour.'
In the sphere of executive work the problem of sanctions for
negligence arises in a different but no less serious form. It has
been well said that while the last resort of a competitive econ­
omy is the bailiff, the ultimate sanction of a planned economy is
the hangman. 2 The powers the manager of any plant will have to
be given will still be considerable. But no more than in the case
of the worker can the manager's position and income in a
planned system be made to depend merely on the success or
failure of the work under his direction. As neither the risk nor
the gain is his, it cannot be his personal judgment, but whether
he does what he ought to have done according to some estab­
lished rule, which must decide. A mistake he "ought" to have
avoided is not his own affair, it is a crime against the community
and must be treated as such. While so long as he keeps to the safe
path of objectively ascertainable duty he may be surer of his
income than the capitalist entrepreneur, the danger which
threatens him in case of real failure is worse than bankruptcy. He
may be economically secure so long as he satisfies his superiors,
but this security is bought at the price of the safety of freedom
and life.
The conflict with which we have to deal is indeed a quite
fundamental one between two irreconcilable types of social
organisation, which, from the most characteristic forms in
1 D. C. Coyle, "The Twilight of National Planning," Harpers' Magazine, October
1935, p. 558.
2 W Roepke, Die Gesellschaftskrisisder Gegenwart,Zurich, 1942, p. 172.SECURITY AND FREEDOM 131
which they appear, have often been described as the commercial
and the military type of society. The terms were, perhaps,
unfortunate, because they direct attention to unessentials and
make it difficult to see that we face here a real alternative and that
there is no third possibility. Either both the choice and the risk
rest with the individual or he is relieved of both. The army does
indeed in many ways represent the closest approach familiar to
us to the second type of organisation, where work and worker
alike are allotted by authority and where, if the available means
are scanty, everybody is alike put on short commons. This is the
only system in which the individual can be conceded full eco­
nomic security and through the extension of which to the whole
of society it can be achieved for all its members. This security is,
however, inseparable from the restrictions on liberty and the
hierarchical order of military life-it is the security of the
barracks.
It is possible, of course, to organise sections of an otherwise
free society on this principle and there is no reason why this
form of life, with its necessary restrictions on individual liberty ,
should not be open to those who prefer it. Indeed, some volun­
tary labour service on military lines might well be the best form
for the state to provide the certainty of an opportunity for work
and a minimum income for all. That proposals of this sort have
in the past proved so little acceptable is due to the fact that those
who are willing to surrender their freedom for security have
always demanded that if they give up their full freedom it should
also be taken from those not prepared to do so. For this claim it is
difficult to find a justification.
The military type of organisation as we know it gives us,
however, only a very inadequate picture of what it would be like
if it were extended to the whole of society. So long as only a part
of society is organised on military lines, the unfreedom of the
members of the military organisation is mitigated by the fact
that there is still a free sphere to which they can move if the132 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
restrictions become too irksome. If we want to form a picture of
what society would be like if, according to the ideal which has
seduced so many socialists, it was organised as a single great
factory, we have to look to ancient Sparta, or to contemporary
Germany, which after moving for two or three generations in
this direction, has now so nearly reached it.
* * * * *
In a society used to freedom it is unlikely that many people
would be ready deliberately to purchase security at this price.
But the policies which are now followed everywhere, which
hand out the privilege of security, now to this group and now to
that, are nevertheless rapidly creating conditions in which the
striving for security tends to become stronger than the love of
freedom. The reason for this is that with every grant of complete
security to one group the insecurity of the rest necessarily
increases. If you guarantee to some a fixed part of a variable cake,
the share left to the rest is bound to fluctuate proportionally
more than the size of the whole. And the essential element of
security which the competitive system offers, the great variety of
opportunities, is more and more reduced.
Within the market system, security can be granted to particu­
lar groups only by the kind of planning known as restrictionism
(which includes, however, almost all the planning which is actu­
ally practised!). "Control", i.e. limitation of output so that prices
will secure an "adequate" return, is the only way in which in a
market economy producers can be guaranteed a certain income.
But this necessarily involves a reduction of opportunities open to
others. If the producer, be he entrepreneur or worker, is to be
protected against underbidding by outsiders, it means that
others who are worse off are precluded from sharing in the
relatively greater prosperity of the controlled industries. Every
restriction on the freedom of entry into a trade reduces the
security of all those outside it. And as the number of thoseSECURITY AND FREEDOM 133
whose income is secured in this manner increases, the field of
alternative opportunities is restricted which are open to anyone
who suffers a loss of income; and for those unfavourably affected
by any change the chance of avoiding a fatal diminution of their
income is correspondingly diminished. And if, as has become
increasingly true, in each trade in which conditions improve, the
members are allowed to exclude others in order to secure to
themselves the full gain in the form of higher wages or profits,
those in the trades where demand has fallen have nowhere to go
and every change becomes the cause of large unemployment.
There can be little doubt that it is largely a consequence of the
striving for security by these means in the last decades that
unemployment and thus insecurity for large sections of the
population has so much increased.
In this country such restrictions, especially those affecting the
intermediate strata of society, have assumed important dimen­
sions only in comparatively recent times, and we have scarcely
yet realised their full consequences. The utter hopelessness of the
position of those who, in a society which has thus grown rigid,
are left outside the range of sheltered occupation, and the magni­
tude of the gulf which separates them from the fortunate posses­
sor of jobs for whom protection against competition has made it
unnecessary to budge ever so little to make room for those with­
out can only be appreciated by those who have experienced it. It
is not a question of the fortunate ones giving up their places, but
merely that they should share in the common misfortune by
some reduction of their incomes, or frequently even merely by
some sacrifice of their prospects of improvement. The protection
of their "standard of life" , of the "fair price", or the "professional
income" to which they regard themselves as entitled, and in the
protection of which they receive the support of the state, pre­
cludes this. In consequence, instead of prices, wages, and indi­
vidual incomes, it is now employment and production which
have become subject to violent fluctuations. There has never been134 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
a worse and more cruel exploitation of one class by another than
that of the weaker or less fortunate members of a group of pro­
ducers by the well-established which has been made possible by
the "regulation" of competition. Few catchwords have done so
much harm as the ideal of a "stabilisation" of particular prices
(or wages) which, while securing the income of some, makes the
position of the rest more and more precarious.
Thus, the more we try to provide full security by interfering
with the market system, the greater the insecurity becomes; and,
what is worse, the greater becomes the contrast between the
security of those to whom it is granted as a privilege and the
ever-increasing insecurity of the under-privileged And the more
security becomes a privilege, and the greater the danger to those
excluded from it, the higher will security be prized. As the num­
ber of the privileged increases and the difference between their
security and the insecurity of the others increases, a completely
new set of social values gradually arises. It is no longer
independence but security which gives rank and status, the cer­
tain right to a pension more than confidence in his making good
which makes a young man eligible for marriage, while insecur­
ity becomes the dreaded state of the pariah in which those who
in their youth have been refused admission to the haven of a
salaried position remain for life.
* * * * *
The general endeavour to achieve security by restrictive meas­
ures, tolerated or supported by the state, has in the course of
time produced a progressive transformation of society-a trans­
formation in which, as in so many other ways, Germany has led
and the other countries have followed. This development has
been hastened by another effect of socialist teaching, the delib­
erate disparagement of all activities involving economic risk and
the moral opprobrium cast on the gains which make risks worth
taking but which only few can win. We cannot blame our youngSECURITY AND FREEDOM 135
men when they prefer the safe, salaried position to the risk of
enterprise after they have heard from their earliest youth the
former described as the superior, more unselfish and disinter­
ested occupation. The younger generation of to-day has grown
up in a world in which in school and press the spirit of com­
mercial enterprise has been represented as disreputable and the
making of profit as immoral, where to employ a hundred people
is represented as exploitation but to command the same number
as honourable. Older people may regard this as an exaggeration
of the present state of affairs, but the daily experience of the
University teacher leaves little doubt that as a result of anti­
capitalist propaganda values have already altered far in advance
of the change in institutions which has yet taken place in this
country. The question is whether by changing our institutions to
satisfy the new demands, we shall not unwittingly destroy values
which we still rate higher.
The change in the structure of society involved in the victory
of the ideal of security over that of independence cannot be
better illustrated than by a comparison of what ten or twenty
years ago could still be regarded as the English and the German
type of society. However great the influence of the army may
have been in the latter country, it is a grave mistake to ascribe
what the Englishman regarded as the "military" character of
German society mainly to that influence. The difference went
much deeper than could be explained on that ground, and the
peculiar attributes of German society existed no less in circles in
which the properly military influence was negligible than in
those in which it was strong. It was not so much that at almost all
times a larger part of the German people was organised for war
than was true in other countries, but that the same type of
organisation was employed for so many other purposes, which
gave German society its peculiar character. It was that a larger
part of the civil life of Germany than of any other country was
deliberately organised from the top, that so large a proportion of136 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
her people did not regard themselves as independent but as
appointed functionaries, which gave her social structure its
peculiar character. Germany had, as the Germans themselves
boasted, for long been a Beamtenstaatin which not only in the
Civil Service proper but in almost all spheres of life income and
status were assigned and guaranteed by some authority.
While it is doubtful whether the spirit of freedom can any­
where be extirpated by force, it is not certain that any people
would successfully withstand the process by which it was slowly
smothered in Germany. Where distinction and rank is achieved
almost exclusively by becoming a salaried servant of the state,
where to do one's assigned duty is regarded as more laudable
than to choose one's own field of usefulness, where all pursuits
that do not give a recognised place in the official hierarchy or a
claim to a fixed income are regarded as inferior and even some­
what disreputable, it is too much to expect that many will long
prefer freedom to security. And where the alternative to security
in a dependent position is a most precarious position, in which
one is despised alike for success and for failure, only few will
resist the temptation of safety at the price of freedom. Once
things have gone so far, liberty indeed becomes almost a mock­
ery, since it can be purchased only by the sacrifice of most of the
good things of this earth. In this state it is little surprising that
more and more people should come to feel that without eco­
nomic security liberty is "not worth having" and that they are
willing to sacrifice their liberty for security. But it is disquieting
to find Professor Harold Laskiin this country employing the very
same argument which has perhaps done more than any other to
induce the German people to sacrifice their liberty. 1
1 H. J. Laski, Liberty in the Modern State (Pelican edition 1937, p. 51): "Those who
know the normal life of the poor, its haunting sense of impending disaster, its
fitful search for beauty which perpetually eludes, will realise well enough that,
without economic security, liberty is not worth having."SECURITY AND FREEDOM 137
There can be no question that adequate security against severe
privation, and the reduction of the avoidable causes of mis­
directed effort and consequent disappointment, will have to be
one of the main goals of policy. But if these endeavours are to be
successful and not to destroy individual freedom, security must
be provided outside the market and competition be left to func­
tion unobstructed. Some security is essential if freedom is to be
preserved, because most men are willing to bear the risk which
freedom inevitably involves only so long as that risk is not too
great. But while this is a truth of which we must never lose sight,
nothing is more fatal than the present fashion among intellectual
leaders of extolling security at the expense of freedom. It is
essential that we should re-Iearn frankly to face the fact that
freedom can only be had at a price and that as individuals we
must be prepared to make severe material sacrifices to preserve
our liberty. If we want to retain this we must regain the convic­
tion on which the rule of liberty in the Anglo-Saxon countries
has been based and which Benjamin Franklin expressed in a
phrase applicable to us in our lives as individuals no less than as
nations: "Those who would give up essential liberty to purchase
a little temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor safety."10
WHY THE WORST GET ON TOP
All power corrupts, absolute power corrupts absolutely.
Lord Acton.
We must now examine a belief from which many who regard
the advent of totalitarianism as inevitable derive consolation and
which seriously weakens the resistance of many others who
would oppose it with all their might if they fully apprehended its
nature. It is the belief that the most repellent features of the
totalitarian regimes are due to the historical accident that they
were established by groups of blackguards and thugs. Surely, it is
argued, if in Germany the creation of a totalitarian regime
brought the Streichers and Killingers, the Leys and Heines, the
Himmlers and Heydrichs to power, this may prove the vicious­
ness of the German character, but not that the rise of such people
is the necessary consequence of a totalitarian system. Why
should it not be possible that the same sort of system, if it be
necessary to achieve important ends, be run by decent people for
the good of the community as a whole?WHY THE WORST GET ON TOP 139
We must not deceive ourselves into believing that all good
people must be democrats or will necessarily wish to have a
share in the government. Many, no doubt, would rather entrust
it to somebody whom they think more competent. Although this
might be unwise, there is nothing bad or dishonourable in
approving a dictatorship of the good. Totalitarianism, we can
already hear it argued, is a powerful system alike for good and
evil, and the purpose for which it will be used depends entirely
on the dictators. And those who think that it is not the system
which we need fear, but the danger that it might be run by bad
men, might even be tempted to forestall this danger by seeing
that it is established in time by good men.
No doubt an English "fascist" system would greatly differ
from the Italian or German models; no doubt if the transition
were effected without violence, we might expect to get a
better type of leader. And if I had to live under a fascist system
I have no doubt that I would rather live under one run by
Englishmen than under one run by anybody else. Yet all this
does not mean that, judged on our present standards, a British
fascist system would in the end prove so very different or
much less intolerable than its prototypes. There are strong
reasons for believing that what to us appear the worst features
of the existing totalitarian systems are not accidental by­
products, but phenomena which totalitarianism is certain
sooner or later to produce. Just as the democratic statesman
who sets out to plan economic life will soon be confronted
with the alternative of either assuming dictatorial powers or
abandoning his plans, so the totalitarian dictator would soon
have to choose between disregard of ordinary morals and fail­
ure. It is for this reason that the unscrupulous and uninhibited
are likely to be more successful in a society tending towards
totalitarianism. Who does not see this has not yet grasped the
full width of the gulf which separates totalitarianism from a
liberal regime, the utter difference between the whole moral140 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
atmosphere under collectivism and the essentially individualist
Western civilisation.
The "moral basis of collectivism" has, of course, been much
debated in the past; but what concerns us here is not its moral
basis but its moral results. The usual discussions of the ethical
aspects of collectivism refer to the question whether collectivism
is demanded by existing moral convictions; or what moral con­
victions would be required if collectivism is to produce the
hoped-for results. Our question, however, is what moral views
will be produced by a collectivist organisation of society, or
what views are likely to rule it. The interaction between morals
and institutions may well have the effect that the ethics produced
by collectivism will be altogether different from the moral ideals
that lead to the demand for collectivism. While we are apt to
think that, since the desire for a collectivist system springs from
high moral motives, such a system must be the breeding ground
for the highest virtues, there is, in fact, no reason why any sys­
tem should necessarily enhance those attitudes which serve the
purpose for which it was designed. The ruling moral views will
depend partly on the qualities that will lead individuals to suc­
cess in a collectivist or totalitarian system, and partly on the
requirements of the totalitarian machinery.
* * * * *
We must here return for a moment to the position which
precedes the suppression of democratic institutions and the cre­
ation of a totalitarian regime. In this stage it is the general
demand for quick and determined government action that is the
dominating element in the situation, dissatisfaction with the
slow and cumbersome course of democratic procedure which
makes action for action's sake the goal. It is then the man or the
party who seems strong and resolute enough "to get things
done" who exercises the greatest appeal. "Strong" in this sense
means not merely a numerical majority-it is the ineffectivenessWHYTHEWORSTGETONTOP 141
of parliamentary majorities with which people are dissatisfied.
What they will seek is somebody with such solid support as to
inspire confidence that he can carry out whatever he wants. It is
here that the new type of party, organised on military lines,
comes in.
In the Central European countries the socialist parties had
familiarised the masses with political organisations of a semi­
military character designed to absorb as much as possible of the
private life of the members. All that was wanted to give one
group overwhelming power was to carry the same principle
somewhat further, to seek strength not in the assured votes of
huge numbers at occasional elections, but in the absolute and
unreserved support of a smaller but more thoroughly organised
body. The chance of imposing a totalitarian regime on a whole
people depends on the leader first collecting round him a group
which is prepared voluntarily to submit to that totalitarian
discipline which they are to impose by force upon the rest.
Although the socialist parties had the strength to get anything
if they had cared to use force, they were reluctant to do so. They
had, without knowing it, set themselves a task which only the
ruthless, ready to disregard the barriers of accepted morals, can
execute.
That socialism can be put into practice only by methods
which most socialists disapprove is, of course, a lesson learnt by
many social reformers in the past. The old socialist parties were
inhibited by their democratic ideals, they did not possess the
ruthlessness required for the performance of their chosen task. It
is characteristic that both in Germany and Italy the success of
Fascism was preceded by the refusal of the socialist parties to
take over the responsibilities of government. They were unwill­
ing wholeheartedly to employ the methods to which they had
pointed the way. They still hoped for the miracle of a majority
agreeing on a particular plan for the organisation of the whole of
society; others had already learnt the lesson that in a planned142 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
society the question can no longer be on what a majority of the
people agree, but what is the largest single group whose mem­
bers agree sufficiently to make unified direction of all affairs
possible; or, if no such group large enough to enforce its views
exists, how it can be created and who will succeed in creating it.
There are three main reasons why such a numerous and
strong group with fairly homogeneous views is not likely to be
formed by the best but rather by the worst elements of any
society. By our standards the principles on which such a group
would be selected will be almost entirely negative.
In the first instance, it is probably true that in general the
higher the education and intelligence of individuals becomes,
the more their views and tastes are differentiated and the less
likely they are to agree on a particular hierarchy of values. It is a
corollary of this that if we wish to find a high degree of uniform­
ity and similarity of outlook, we have to descend to the regions
of lower moral and intellectual standards where the more primi­
tive and "common" instincts and tastes prevail. This does not
mean that the majority of people have low moral standards; it
merely means that the largest group of people whose values are
very similar are the people with low standards. It is, as it were,
the lowest common denominator which unites the largest num­
ber of people. If a numerous group is needed, strong enough to
impose their views on the values of life on all the rest, it will
never be those with highly differentiated and developed tastes­
it will be those who form the "mass" in the derogatory sense of
the term, the least original and independent, who will be able to
put the weight of their numbers behind their particular ideals.
If, however, a potential dictator had to rely entirely on those
whose uncomplicated and primitive instincts happen to be very
similar, their number would scarcely give sufficient weight to
their endeavours. He will have to increase their numbers by
converting more to the same simple creed.
Here comes in the second negative principle of selection: heWHY THE WORST GET ON TOP 143
will be able to obtain the support of all the docile and gullible,
who have no strong convictions of their own but are prepared to
accept a ready-made system of values if it is only drummed into
their ears suffiCiently loudly and frequently. It will be those
whose vague and imperfectly formed ideas are easily swayed and
whose passions and emotions are readily aroused who will thus
swell the ranks of the totalitarian party.
It is in connection with the deliberate effort of the skilful
demagogue to weld together a closely coherent and homo­
geneous body of supporters that the third and perhaps most
important negative element of selection enters. It seems to be
almost a law of human nature that it is easier for people to agree
on a negative programme, on the hatred of an enemy, on the
envy of those better off, than on any positive task. The contrast
between the "we" and the "they", the common fight against
those outside the group, seems to be an essential ingredient in
any creed which will solidly knit together a group for common
action. It is consequently always employed by those who seek,
not merely support of a policy, but the unreserved allegiance of
huge masses. From their point of view it has the great advantage
of leaving them greater freedom of action than almost any posi­
tive programme. The enemy, whether he be internal like the
"Jew" or the "Kulak", or external, seems to be an indispensable
requisite in the armoury of a totalitarian leader.
That in Germany it was the Jew who became the enemy till his
place was taken by the "plutocracies" was no less a result of the
anti-capitalist resentment on which the whole movement was
based than the selection of the Kulak in Russia. In Germany and
Austria the Jew had come to be regarded as the representative of
capitalism because a traditional dislike of large classes of the
population for commercial pursuits had left these more readily
accessible to a group that was practically excluded from the
more highly esteemed occupations. It is the old story of the alien
race being admitted only to the less respected trades and then144 THE R0 AD TO S E RFDO M
being hated still more for practising them. The fact that German
anti-semitism and anti-capitalism spring from the same root is
of great importance for the understanding of what has happened
there, but this is rarely grasped by foreign observers.
* * * * *
To treat the universal tendency of collectivist policy to become
nationalistic as due entirely to the necessity for securing
unhesitating support would be to neglect another and no less
important factor. It may indeed be questioned whether anybody
can realistically conceive of a collectivist programme other than
in the service of a limited group, whether collectivism can exist
in any other form than that of some kind of particularism, be it
nationalism, racialism, or class-ism. The belief in the community
of aims and interests with fellow-men seems to presuppose a
greater degree of similarity of outlook and thought than exists
between men merely as human beings. If the other members of
one's group cannot all be personally known, they must at least
be of the same kind as those around us, think and talk in the
same way and about the same kind of things, in order that we
may identify ourselves with them. Collectivism on a world scale
seems to be unthinkable-except in the service of a small ruling
elite. It would certainly raise not only technical but above all
moral problems which none of our socialists are willing to face.
If the English proletarian is entitled to an equal share of the
income now derived from England's capital resources, and of
the control of their use, because they are the result of exploita­
tion, so on the same principle all the Indians would be entitled
not only to the income from but also to the use of a proportional
share of the British capital. But what socialists seriously contem­
plate the equal division of existing capital resources among the
people of the world? They all regard the capital as belonging not
to humanity but to the nation-though even within the nation
few would dare to advocate that the richer regions should beWHYTHEWORSTGETONTOP 145
deprived of some of "their" capital equipment in order to help
the poorer regions. What socialists proclaim as a duty towards
the fellow members of the existing states, they are not prepared
to grant to the foreigner. From a consistent collectivist point of
view the claims of the "Have-Not" nations for a new division of
the world are entirely justified-though, if consistently applied,
those who demand it most loudly would lose by it almost as
much as the richest nations. They are, therefore, careful not to
base their claims on any equalitarian principles but on their
pretended superior capacity to organise other peoples.
One of the inherent contradictions of the collectivist philo­
sophy is, that while basing itself on the humanistic morals which
individualism has developed, it is practicable only within a rela­
tively small group. That socialism so long as it remains theor­
etical, is internationalist, while as soon as it is put into practice,
whether in Russia or in Germany, it becomes violently national­
ist, is one of the reasons why "liberal socialism" as most people
in the Western world imagine it is purely theoretical, while the
practice of socialism is everywhere totalitarian. 1 Collectivism has
no room for the wide humanitarianism of liberalism but only
for the narrow particularism of the totalitarian.
If the "community" or the state are prior to the individual, if
they have ends of their own independent of and superior to
those of the individuals, only those individuals who work for the
same ends can be regarded as members of the community. It is a
necessary consequence of this view that a person is respected
only as a member of the group, that is, only if and in so far as he
works for the recognised common ends, and that he derives his
whole dignity only from this membership and not merely from
being man. Indeed, the very concepts of humanity and therefore
of any form of internationalism are entirely products of the
I Cf. now the instructive discussion in F. Borkenau, Socialism, National or
International?,1942.146 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
individualist view of man, and there can be no place for them in
a collectivist system of thought.}
Apart from the basic fact that the community of collectivism
can extend only as far as the unity of purpose of the individuals
exists or can be created, several contributory factors strengthen
the tendency of collectivism to become particularist and
exclusive. Of these one of the most important is that the desire of
the individual to identify himself with a group is very frequently
the result of a feeling of inferiority, and that therefore his want
will only be satisfied if membership of the group confers some
superiority over outsiders. Sometimes, it seems, the very fact that
these violent instincts which the individual knows he must curb
within the group can be given a free range in the collective
action towards the outsider, becomes a further inducement for
merging personality in that of the group. There is a profound
truth expressed in the title of R. Niebuhr's Moral Man and Immoral
Society-however little we can follow him in the conclusions he
draws from his thesis. There is indeed, as he says elsewhere, "an
increasing tendency among modern men to imagine themselves
ethical because they have delegated their vices to larger and
larger groups."2 To act on behalf of a group seems to free people
of many of the moral restraints which control their behaviour as
individuals within the group.
The definitely antagonistic attitude which most planners take
towards internationalism is further explained by the fact that in
I It is entirely in the spirit of collectivism when Nietzsche makes his
Zarathustra say:
"A thousand goals have existed hitherto, for a thousand people existed. But
the fetter for the thousand necks is still lacking, the one goal is still lacking.
Humanity has no goal yet.
"But tell me, I pray, my brethren: if the goal be lacking to humanity, is not
humanity itself lacking?"
2 Quoted from an article of Dr. Niebuhr's by E. H. Carr, The Twenty Years' Crisis,
1941, p. 203.WHY THE WORST GET ON TOP 147
the existing world all outside contacts of a group are obstacles to
their effectively planning the sphere in which they can attempt
it. It is therefore no accident that, as the editor of one of the most
comprehensive collective studies on planning has discovered to
his chagrin, "most 'planners' are militant nationalists" .I
The nationalist and imperialist propensities of socialist plan­
ners' much more common than is generally recognised, are not
always as flagrant as, for example, in the case of the Webbs and
some of the other early Fabians, with whom enthusiasm for
planning was characteristically combined with the veneration
for the large and powerful political units and a contempt for the
small state. The historian Elie Ha!t§vy, speaking of the Webbs
when he first knew them forty years ago, records that
their socialism was profoundly anti-liberal. They did not hate
the Tories, indeed they were extraordinarily lenient to them,
but they had no mercy for Gladstonian Liberalism. It was the
time of the Boer War and both the advanced liberals and the
men who were beginning to form the Labour Party had gen­
erously sided with the Boers against British Imperialism, in
the name of freedom and humanity. But the two Webbs and
their friend, Bernard Shaw, stood apart. They were ostenta­
tiously imperialistic. The independence of small nations
might mean something to the liberal individualist. It meant
nothing to collectivists like themselves. I can still hear Sidney
Webb explaining to me that the future belonged to the great
administrative nations, where the officials govern and the
police keep order.
And elsewhere Halevy quotes Bernard Shaw arguing, about the
same time, that "the world is to the big and powerful states by
1 Findlay MacKenzie (ed.), Planned Society, Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow: A Symposium,
1937, p. xx.148 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
necessity; and the little ones must come within their border or
be crushed out of existence".
1
I have quoted at length these passages, which would not sur­
prise one in a description of the German ancestors of national
socialism, because they provide so characteristic an example of
that glorification of power which easily leads from socialism to
nationalism and which profoundly affects the ethical views of all
collectivists. So far as the rights of small nations are concerned,
Marx and Engels were little better than most other consistent col­
lectivists, and the views they occasionally expressed about Czechs
or Poles resemble those of contemporary National Socialists.2
* * * * *
While to the great individualist social philosophers of the nine­
teenth century, to a Lord Acton or Jacob Burckhardt, down to
contemporary socialists, like Bertrand Russell, who have
inherited the liberal tradition, power itself has always appeared
the arch -evil, to the strict collectivist it is a goal in itself. It is not
only, as Russell has so well described, that the desire to organise
social life according to a unitary plan itself springs largely from a
desire for power. 3 It is even more the outcome of the fact that in
order to achieve their end collectivists must create power­
power over men wielded by other men-of a magnitude never
before known, and that their success will depend on the extent
to which they achieve such power.
This remains true even though many liberal socialists are
guided in their endeavours by the tragic illusion that by depriv­
ing private individuals of the power they possess in an indi­
vidualist system, and by transferring this power to society, they
I E. Halevy, L'Ere des Tyrannies, Paris, 1938, p. 2 17, and History of the English People,
Epilogue, vol. I, pp. 105-6.
2 Cf. K. Marx, Revolution and Counter-revolution,and Engels' letter to Marx, May 23,
1851.
3 Bertrand Russell, The ScientificOutlook, 193 1, p. 211.WHYTHEWORSTGETONTOP 149
can thereby extinguish power. What all those who argue in this
manner overlook is that by concentrating power so that it can be
used in the service of a single plan, it is not merely transferred
but infinitely heightened; that by uniting in the hands of some
single body power formerly exercised independently by many,
an amount of power is created infinitely greater than any that
existed before, so much more far-reaching as almost to be dif­
ferent in kind. It is entirely fallacious when it is sometimes
argued that the great power exercised by a Central Planning
Board would be "no greater than the power collectively exer­
cised by private boards of directors".1 There is, in a competitive
society, nobody who can exercise even a fraction of the power
which a socialist planning board would possess, and if nobody
can consciously use the power, it is just an abuse of words to
assert that it rests with all the capitalists put together. 2 It is merely
a play upon words to speak of the "power collectively exercised
by private boards of directors" so long as they do not combine
to concerted action-which would, of course, mean the end of
competition and the creation of a planned economy. To split or
decentralise power is necessarily to reduce the absolute amount
of power and the competitive system is the only system designed
to minimise by decentralisation the power exercised by man
over man.
We have seen before how the separation of economic and
political aims is an essential guarantee of individual freedom and
I B. E. Lippincott, in his Introduction to O. Lange and F. M. Taylor,On the Economic
Theory of Socialism,Minneapolis, 1938, p. 33.
2 We must not allow ourselves to be deceived by the fact that the word power,
apart from the sense in which it is used with respect to human beings, is also
used in an impersonal (or rather anthropomorphic) sense for any determining
cause. Of course there will always be something that determines everything
that happens, and in this sense the amount of power existing must always be
the same. But this is not true of the power consciously wielded by human
beings.150 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
how it is consequently attacked by all collectivists. To this we
must now add that the "substitution of political for economic
power" now so often demanded means necessarily the substitu­
tion of power from which there is no escape for a power which
is always limited. What is called economic power, while it can be
an instrument of coercion, is in the hands of private individuals
never exclusive or complete power, never power over the whole
life of a person. But centralised as an instrument of political
power it creates a degree of dependence scarcely distinguishable
from slavery.
* * * * *
From the two central features of every collectivist system, the
need for a commonly accepted system of ends of the group, and
the all-overriding desire to give to the group the maximum of
power to achieve these ends, grows a definite system of morals,
which on some points coincides and on others violently con­
trasts with ours-but differs from it in one point which makes it
doubtful whether we can call it morals: that it does not leave the
individual conscience free to apply its own rules and does not
even know any general rules which the individual is required or
allowed to observe in all circumstances. This makes collectivist
morals so different from what we have known as morals that we
find it difficult to discover any principle in them, which they
nevertheless possess.
The difference of principle is very much the same as that
which we have already considered in connection with the Rule
of Law. Like formal law the rules of individualist ethics, however
unprecise they may be in many respects, are general and abso­
lute; they prescribe or prohibit a general type of action irrespect­
ive of whether in the particular instance the ultimate purpose is
good or bad. To cheat or steal, to torture or betray a confidence,
is held to be bad, irrespective of whether or not in the particular
instance any harm follows from it. Neither the fact that in a givenWHY TH E WORST GET ON TOP 151
instance nobody may be the worse for it, nor any high purpose
for which such an act may have been committed, can alter the
fact that it is bad. Though we may sometimes be forced to
choose between different evils they remain evils. The principle
that the end justifies the means is in individualist ethics regarded
as the denial of all morals. In collectivist ethics it becomes neces­
sarily the supreme rule; there is literally nothing which the con­
sistent collectivist must not be prepared to do if it serves "the
good of the whole", because the" good of the whole" is to him
the only criterion of what ought to be done. The raison d'etat, in
which collectivist ethics has found its most explicit formulation,
knows no other limit than that set by expediency-the suit­
ability of the particular act for the end in view. And what the
raison d'etat affirms with respect to the relations between different
countries applies equally to the relations between different indi­
viduals within the collectivist state. There can be no limit to
what its citizen must not be prepared to do, no act which his
conscience must prevent him from committing, if it is necessary
for an end which the community has set itself or which his
superiors order him to achieve.
* * * * *
The absence of absolute formal rules in collectivist ethics does
not, of course, mean that there are not some useful habits of the
individuals which a collectivist community will encourage, and
others which it will discourage. Quite the reverse; it will take a
much greater interest in the individual's habits of life than an
individualist community. To be a useful member of a collectivist
society requires very definite qualities which must be strength­
ened by constant practice. The reason why we designate these
qualities as "useful habits" and can hardly describe them as
moral virtues is that the individual could never be allowed to put
these rules above any definite orders, or to let them become an
obstacle to the achievement of any of the particular aims of his152 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
community. They only serve, as it were, to fill any gaps which
direct orders or the designation of particular aims may leave, but
they can never justify a conflict with the will of the authority.
The differences between the virtues which will continue to be
esteemed under a collectivist system and those which will dis­
appear is well illustrated by a comparison of the virtues which
even their worst enemies admit the Germans, or rather the
"typical Prussian", to possess, and those of which they are com­
monly thought lacking and in which the English people, with
some justification, used to pride themselves as excelling. Few
people will deny that the Germans on the whole are industrious
and disciplined, thorough and energetic to the degree of ruth­
lessness, conscientious and single-minded in any tasks they
undertake, that they possess a strong sense of order, duty, and
strict obedience to authority, and that they often show great
readiness to make personal sacrifices and great courage in phy­
sical danger. All these make the German an efficient instrument
in carrying out an assigned task, and they have accordingly been
carefully nurtured in the old Prussian state and the new Prussian­
dominated Reich. What the "typical German" is often thought
to lack are the individualist virtues of tolerance and respect for
other individuals and their opinions, of independence of mind
and that uprightness of character and readiness to defend one's
own convictions against a superior which the Germans them­
selves, usually conscious that they lack it, call Zivi1courage,of con­
sideration for the weak and infirm, and of that healthy contempt
and dislike of power which only an old tradition of personal
liberty creates. Deficient they seem also in most of those little yet
so important qualities which facilitate the intercourse between
men in a free society: kindliness and a sense of humour, personal
modesty, and respect for the privacy and belief in the good
intentions of one's neighbour.
After what we have already said it will not cause surprise that
these individualist virtues are at the same time eminently socialWHYTHEWORSTGETONTOP 153
virtues, virtues which smooth social contacts and which make
.control from above less necessary and at the same time more
difficult. They are virtues which flourish wherever the indi­
vidualist or commercial type of society has prevailed and which
are missing according as the collectivist or military type of soci­
ety predominates-a difference which is, or was, as noticeable
between the various regions of Germany as it has now become
of the views which rule in Germany and those characteristic of
the West. Till recently, at least, in those parts of Germany which
have been longest exposed to the civilising forces of commerce,
the old commercial towns of the south and west and the Hanse
towns, the general moral concepts were probably much more
akin to those of the Western people than to those which have
now become dominant all over Germany.
It would, however, be highly unjust to regard the masses of
the totalitarian people as devoid of moral fervor because they
give unstinted support to a system which to us seems a denial of
most moral values. For the great majority of them the opposite is
probably true: the intensity of the moral emotions behind a
movement like that of National-Socialism or communism can
probably be compared only to those of the great religious
movements of history. Once you admit that the individual is
merely a means to serve the ends of the higher entity called
society or the nation, most of those features of totalitarian
regimes which horrify us follow of necessity. From the collectiv­
ist standpoint intolerance and brutal suppression of dissent, the
complete disregard of the life and happiness of the individual,
are essential and unavoidable consequences of this basic premise,
and the collectivist can admit this and at the same time claim
that his system is superior to one in which the "selfish" interests
of the individual are allowed to obstruct the full realisation of
the ends the community pursues. When German philosophers
again and again represent the striving for personal happiness as
itself immoral and only the fulfilment of an imposed duty as154 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
praiseworthy, they are perfectly sincere, however difficult this
may be to understand for those who have been brought up in a
different tradition.
Where there is one common all-overriding end there is no
room for any general morals or rules. To a limited extent we
ourselves experience this in wartime. But even war and the
greatest peril had led in this country only to a very moderate
approach to totalitarianism, very little setting aside of all other
values in the service of a single purpose. But where a few specific
ends dominate the whole of society, it is inevitable that
occasionally cruelty may become a duty, that acts which revolt
all our feeling, such as the shooting of hostages or the killing of
the old or sick, should be treated as mere matters of expediency,
that the compulsory uprooting and transportation of hundreds
of thousands should become an instrument of policy approved
by almost everybody except the victims, or that suggestions like
that ofa "conscription of woman for breeding purposes" can be
seriously contemplated. There is always in the eyes of the col­
lectivist a greater goal which these acts serve and which to him
justifies them because the pursuit of the common end of society
can know no limits in any rights or values of any individual.
But while for the mass of the citizens of the totalitarian state it
is often unselfish devotion to an ideal, although one that is repel­
lent to us, which makes them approve and even perform such
deeds, this cannot be pleaded for those who guide its policy. To
be a useful assistant in the running of a totalitarian state it is not
enough that a man should be prepared to accept specious justifi­
cation of vile deeds, he must himself be prepared actively to
break every moral rule he has ever known if this seems necessary
to achieve the end set for him. Since it is the supreme leader who
alone determines the ends, his instruments must have no moral
convictions of their own. They must, above all, be unreservedly
committed to the person of the leader; but next to this the most
important thing is that they should be completely unprincipledWHYTHEWORSTGETONTOP 155
and literally capable of everything. They must have no ideals of
their own which they want to realise, no ideas about right or
wrong which might interfere with the intentions of the leader.
There is thus in the positions of power little to attract those who
hold moral beliefs of the kind which in the past have guided the
European peoples, little which could compensate for the dis­
tastefulness of many of the particular tasks, and little opportun­
ity to gratify any more idealistic desires, to recompense for the
undeniable risk, the sacrifice of most of the pleasures of private
life and of personal independence which the posts of great
responsibility involve. The only tastes which are satisfied are the
taste for power as such, the pleasure of being obeyed and of
being part of a well-functioning and immensely powerful
machine to which everything else must give way.
Yet while there is little that is likely to induce men who are
good by our standards to aspire to leading positions in the totali­
tarian machine, and much to deter them, there will be special
opportunities for the ruthless and unscrupulous. There will be
jobs to be done about the badness of which taken by themselves
nobody has any doubt, but which have to be done in the service
of some higher end, and which have to be executed with the
same expertness and efficiency as any others. And as there will
be need for actions which are bad in themselves, and which all
those still influenced by traditional morals will be reluctant to
perform, the readiness to do bad things becomes a path to pro­
motion and power. The positions in a totalitarian society in
which it is necessary to practice cruelty and intimidation, delib­
erate deception and spying, are numerous. Neither the Gestapo
nor the administration of a concentration camp, neither the Min­
istry of Propaganda nor the SA or SS (or their Italian or Russian
counterparts) are suitable places for the exercise of humanitarian
feelings. Yet it is through positions like these that the road to the
highest positions in the totalitarian state leads. It is only too true
when a distinguished American economist concludes from a156 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
similar brief enumeration of the duties of the authorities of a
collectivist state that
they wouId have to do these things whether they wanted to or
not: and the probability of the people in power being indi­
viduals who would dislike the possession and exercise of power
is on a level with the probability that an extremely tender­
hearted person would get the job of whipping-master in a slave
plantation.'
We cannot, however, exhaust this subject here. The problem
of the selection of the leaders is closely bound up with the wide
problem of selection according to the opinions held, or rather
according to the readiness with which a person conforms to an
ever-changing set of doctrines. And this leads us to one of the
most characteristic moral features of totalitarianism, its relation
to, and its effect on, all the virtues falling under the general
heading of truthfulness. This is so big a subject that it requires a
separate chapter.
1 Professor F. H. Knight in The Journal of PoliticalEconomy, December 1938, p. 869.11
THE END OF TRUTH
It is significant that the nationalisation of thought has pro­
ceeded everywhere pari passu with the nationalisation of
industry.
E. H. Carr.
The most effective way of making everybody serve the single
system of ends towards which the social plan is directed is to
make everybody believe in those ends. To make a totalitarian
system function efficiently it is not enough that everybody
should be forced to work for the same ends. It is essential that
the people should come to regard them as their own ends.
Although the beliefs must be chosen for the people and imposed
upon them, they must become their beliefs, a generally accepted
creed which makes the individuals as far as possible act spon­
taneously in the way the planner wants. If the feeling of oppres­
sion in totalitarian countries is in general much less acute than
most people in liberal countries imagine, this is because the
totalitarian governments succeed to a high degree in making
people think as they want them to.158 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
This is, of course, brought about by the various forms of
propaganda. Its technique is now so familiar that we need say
little about it. The only point that needs to be stressed is that
neither propaganda in itself, nor the techniques employed, are
peculiar to totalitarianism, and that what so completely changes
its nature and effect in a totalitarian state is that all propaganda
serves the same goal, that all the instruments of propaganda are
co-ordinated to influence the individuals in the same direction
and to produce the characteristic Gleichschaltungof all minds. As a
result, the effect of propaganda in totalitarian countries is differ­
ent not only in magnitude but in kind from that of the propa­
ganda made for different ends by independent and competing
agencies. If all the sources of current information are effectively
under one single control, it is no longer a question of merely
persuading the people of this or that. The skilful propagandist
then has power to mould their minds in any direction he
chooses and even the most intelligent and independent people
cannot entirely escape that influence if they are long isolated
from all other sources of information.
While in the totalitarian states this status of propaganda gives
it a unique power over the minds of the people, the peculiar
moral effects arise not from the technique but from the object
and scope of totalitarian propaganda. If it could be confined to
indoctrinating the people with the whole system of values
towards which the social effort is directed, propaganda would
represent merely a particular manifestation of the characteristic
features of collectivist morals which we have already considered.
If its object were merely to teach the people a definite and com­
prehensive moral code, the problem would be solely whether
this moral code is good or bad. We have seen that the moral code
of a totalitarian society is not likely to appeal to us, that even the
striving for equality by means of a directed economy can only
result in an officially enforced inequality-an authoritarian
determination of the status of each individual in the newTHEENDOFTRUTH 159
hierarchical order; that most of the humanitarian elements of
our morals, the respect for human life, for the weak and for the
individual generally, will disappear. However repellent this may
be to most people, and though it involves a change in moral
standards, it is not necessarily entirely anti-moral. Some features
of such a system may even appeal to the sternest moralists of
a conservative tint and seem to them preferable to the softer
standards of a liberal society.
The moral consequences of totalitarian propaganda which we
must now consider are, however, of an even more profound
kind. They are destructive of all morals because they undermine
one of the foundations of all morals, the sense of and the respect
for truth. From the nature of its task, totalitarian propaganda
cannot confine itself to values, to questions of opinion and
moral convictions in which the individual always will conform
more or less to the views ruling his community, but must extend
to questions of fact where human intelligence is involved in a
different way. This is so, firstly, because in order to induce
people to accept the official values, these must be justified, or
shown to be connected with the values already held by the
people, which usually will involve assertions about causal con­
nections between means and ends; and, secondly, because the
distinction between ends and means, between the goal aimed at
and the measures taken to achieve it, is in fact never so clear-cut
and definite as any general discussion of these problems is apt to
suggest; and because, therefore, people must be brought to agree
not only with the ultimate aims but also with the views about
the facts and possibilities on which the particular measures are
based.
* * * * *
We have seen that agreement on that complete ethical code, that
all-comprehensive system of values which is implicit in an eco­
nomic plan, does not exist in a free society but would have to be160 THE R0 A D TO S E R FDO M
created. But we must not assume that the planner will approach
his task aware of that need, or that, even if he were aware of it, it
would be possible to create such a comprehensive code in
advance. He only finds out about the conflicts between different
needs as he goes along, and has to make his decisions as the
necessity arises. The code of values guiding his decisions does
not exist in abstractobefore the decisions have to be made, it has to
be created with the particular decisions. We have also seen how
this inability to separate the general problem of values from the
particular decisions makes it impossible that a democratic body,
while unable to decide the technical details of a plan, should yet
determine the values guiding it.
And while the planning authority will constantly have to
decide issues on merits about which there exist no definite
moral rules, it will have to justify its decisions to the people-or,
at least, have somehow to make the people believe that they are
the right decisions. Although those responsible for a decision
may have been guided by no more than prejudice, some guiding
principle will have to be stated publicly if the community is not
merely passively to submit but actively to support the measure.
The need to rationalise the likes and dislikes which, for lack of
anything else, must guide the planner in many of his decisions,
and the necessity of stating his reasons in a form in which they
will appeal to as many people as possible, will force him to
construct theories, Le. assertions about the connections between
facts, which then become an integral part of the governing doc­
trine. This process of creating a "myth" to justify his action need
not be conscious. The totalitarian leader may be guided merely
by an instinctive dislike of the state of things he has found and a
desire to create a new hierarchical order which conforms better
to his conception of merit, he may merely know that he dislikes
the Jews who seemed to be so successful in an order which did
not provide a satisfactory place for him, and that he loves and
admires the tall blond man, the "aristocratic" figure of theTHEENDOFTRUTH 161
novels of his youth. So he will readily embrace theories which
seem to provide a rational justification for the prejudices which
he shares with many of his fellows. Thus a pseudo-scientific
theory becomes part of the official creed which to a greater or
lesser degree directs everybody's action. Or the widespread dis­
like of the industrial civilisation and a romantic yearning for
country life, together with a (probably erroneous) idea about
the special value of country people as soldiers, provides the basis
for another myth: Blut und Boden (blood and soil), expresses not
merely ultimate values but a whole host of beliefs about cause
and effect which once they have become ideals directing the
activity of the whole community must not be questioned.
The need for such official doctrines as an instrument of
directing and rallying the efforts of the people has been clearly
foreseen by the various theoreticians of the totalitarian system.
Plato's "noble lies" and Sorel's "myths" serve the same purpose
as the racial doctrine of the Nazis or the theory of the corpora­
tive state of Mussolini. They are all necessarily based on particu­
1ar views about facts which are then elaborated into scientific
theories in order to justify a preconceived opinion.
* * * * *
The most effective way of making people accept the validity of
the values they are to serve is to persuade them that they are
really the same as those which they, or at least the best among
them, have always held, but which were not properly under­
stood or recognised before. The people are made to transfer their
allegiance from the old gods to the new under the pretence that
the new gods really are what their sound instinct had always
told them but what before they had only dimly seen. And the
most efficient technique to this end is to use the old words but
change their meaning. Few traits of totalitarian regimes are at the
same time so confusing to the superficial observer and yet so
characteristic of the whole intellectual climate as the complete162 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
perversion of language, the change of meaning of the words by
which the ideals of the new regimes are expressed.
The worst sufferer in this respect is, of course, the word lib­
erty. It is a word used as freely in totalitarian states as elsewhere.
Indeed it could almost be said-and it should serve as a warning
to us to be on our guard against all the tempters who promise us
New Liberties for OldI-that wherever liberty as we understand it
has been destroyed, this has almost always been done in the
name of some new freedom promised to the people. Even
among us we have "planners for freedom" who promise us a
"collective freedom for the group", the nature of which may be
gathered from the fact that its advocate finds it necessary to
assure us that "naturally the advent of planned freedom does not
mean that all [sic] earlier forms of freedom must be abolished".
Dr. Karl Mannheim, from whose work 2 these sentences are taken,
at least warns us that" a conception of freedom modelled on the
preceding age is an obstacle to any real understanding of the
problem". But his use of the word freedom is as misleading as it
is in the mouth of totalitarian politicians. Like their freedom the
"collective freedom" he offers us is not the freedom of the
members of society but the unlimited freedom of the planner to
do with society what he pleases.3 It is the confusion of freedom
with power carried to the extreme.
In this particular case the perversion of the meaning of the
word has, of course, been well prepared by a long line of Ger­
man philosophers, and not least by many of the theoreticians of
socialism. But freedom or liberty are by no means the only
1 This is the title of a recent work by the American historian C. L. Becker.
2 Man and Societyin an Age of Reconstruction,p. 377.
3 Mr. Peter Drucker (The End of Economic Man, p. 74) correctly observes that "the
less freedom there is, the more there is talk of the 'new freedom'. Yet this new
freedom is a mere word which covers the exact contradiction of all that Europe
ever understood by freedom .... The new freedom which is preached in
Europe is, however, the right of the majority against the individual."TH E EN D OF TRUTH 163
words whose meaning has been changed into their opposites to
make them serve as instruments of totalitarian propaganda. We
have already seen how the same happens to justice and law, right
and equality. The list could be extended till it includes almost all
moral and political terms in general use.
If one has not oneself experienced this process, it is difficult to
appreciate the magnitude of this change of the meaning of
words, the confusion which it causes, and the barriers to any
rational discussion which it creates. It has to be seen to be under­
stood how, if one of two brothers embraces the new faith, after a
short while he appears to speak a different language which
makes any real communication between them impossible. And
the confusion becomes worse because this change of meaning of
the words describing political ideals is not a single event but a
continuous process, a technique employed consciously or
unconsciously to direct the people. Gradually, as this process
continues, the whole language becomes despoiled, words be­
come empty shells deprived of any definite meaning, as capable
of denoting one thing as its opposite and used solely for the
emotional associations which still adhere to them.
* * * * *
It is not difficult to deprive the great majority of independent
thought. But the minority who will retain an inclination to criti­
cise must also be silenced. We have already seen why coercion
cannot be confined to the acceptance of the ethical code under­
lying the plan according to which all social activity is directed.
Since many parts of this code will never be explicitly stated, since
many parts of the guiding scale of values will exist only impli­
citly in the plan, the plan itself in every detail, in fact every act of
the government, must become sacrosanct and exempt from
criticism. If the people are to support the common effort with­
out hesitation, they must be convinced that not only the end
aimed at but also the means chosen are the right ones. The164 THE R0 AD TO S ERF DO M
official creed, to which adherence must be enforced, will there­
fore comprise all the views about facts on which the plan is
based. Public criticism or even expressions of doubt must be
suppressed because they tend to weaken public support. As the
Webbs report of the position in every Russian enterprise:
"Whilst the work is in progress, any public expression of doubt,
or even fear that the plan will not be successful, is an act of
disloyalty and even of treachery because of its possible effects on
the will and on the efforts of the rest of the staff." 1 When the
doubt or fear expressed concerns not the success of a particular
enterprise but of the whole social plan, it must even more be
treated as sabotage.
Facts and theories must thus become no less the object of an
official doctrine than views about values. And the whole appara­
tus for spreading knowledge, the schools and the press, wireless
and cinema, will be used exclusively to spread those views
which, whether true or false, will strengthen the belief in the
rightness of the decisions taken by the authority; and all infor­
mation that might cause doubt or hesitation will be withheld.
The probable effect on the people's loyalty to the system
becomes the only criterion for deciding whether a particular
piece of information is to be published or suppressed. The situ­
ation in a totalitarian state is permanently and in all fields the
same that it is elsewhere in some fields in wartime. Everything
which might cause doubt about the wisdom of the government
or create discontent will be kept from the people. The basis
of unfavourable comparisons with conditions elsewhere, the
knowledge of possible alternatives to the course actually taken,
information which might suggest ~ailure on the part of the
government to live up to its promises or to take advantage of
opportunities to improve conditions, will all be suppressed.
There is consequently no field where the systematic control of
1 S. and B. Webb, Soviet Communism,p. 1038.THEENDOFTRUTH 165
information will not be practised and uniformity of views not
enforced.
This applies even to fields apparently most remote from any
political interests, and particularly to all the sciences, even the
most abstract. That in the disciplines dealing directly with
human affairs and therefore most immediately affecting political
views, such as history, law, or economics, the disinterested
search for truth cannot be allowed in a totalitarian system, and
the vindication of the official views becomes the sole object, is
easily seen and has been amply confirmed by experience. These
disciplines have indeed in all totalitarian countries become the
most fertile factories of the official myths which the rulers use to
guide the minds and wills of their subjects. It is not surprising
that in these spheres even the pretence that they search for truth
is abandoned and that the authorities decide what doctrines
ought to be taught and published.
Totalitarian control of opinion extends, however, also to sub­
jects which at first seem to have no political significance. Some­
times it is difficult to explain why particular doctrines should be
officially proscribed or why others should be encouraged, and it
is curious that these likes and dislikes are apparently somewhat
similar in the different totalitarian systems. In particular, they all
seem to have in common an intense dislike of the more abstract
forms of thought-a dislike characteristically also shown by
many of the collectivists among our scientists. Whether the
theory of relativity is represented as a "semitic attack on the foun­
dation of Christian and Nordic physics" or opposed because it
is "in conflict with dialectical materialism and Marxist dogma"
comes very much to the same thing. Nor does it make much
difference whether certain theorems of mathematical statistics
are attacked because they "form part of the class struggle on the
ideological frontier and are a product of the historical role of
mathematics as the servant of the bourgeoisie", or whether the
whole subject is condemned because "it provides no guarantee166 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
that it will serve the interest of the people". It seems that pure
mathematics is no less a victim and that even the holding of
particular views about the nature of continuity can be ascribed
to "bourgeois prejudices". According to the Webbs the Journal for
Marxist-LeninistNaturalScienceshas the following slogans: "We stand
for Party in Mathematics. We stand for the purity of Marxist­
Leninist theory in surgery." The situation seems to be very
similar in Germany. The Journal of the National-SocialistAssociationof
Mathematiciansis full of "party in mathematics", and one of the
best known German physicists, the Nobel prizeman Lennard,
has summed up his life work under the title German Physics in Four
Volumes!
It is entirely in keeping with the whole spirit of totalitarian­
ism that it condemns any human activity done for its own sake
and without ulterior purpose. Science for science' sake, art for
art's sake, are equally abhorrent to the Nazis, our socialist
intellectuals, and the communists. Every activity must derive its
justification from a conscious social purpose. There must be no
spontaneous, unguided activity, because it might produce
results which cannot be foreseen and for which the plan does
not provide. It might produce something new, undreamt of in
the philosophy of the planner. The principle extends even to
games and amusements. I leave it to the reader to guess whether
it was in Germany or in Russia where chess-players were
offiCiallyexhorted that "we must finish once and for all with the
neutrality of chess. We must condemn once and for all the for­
mula 'chess for the sake of chess' like the formula 'art for art's
sake' ".
Incredible as some of these aberrations may appear, we must
yet be on our guard not to dismiss them as mere accidental by­
products which have nothing to do with the essential character
of a planned or totalitarian system. They are not. They are a
direct result of that same desire to see everything directed by a
"unitary conception of the whole", of the need to uphold at allTHEENDOFTRUTH 167
costs the views in the service of which people are asked to make
constant sacrifices, and of the general idea that the knowledge
and beliefs of the people are an instrument to be used for a
single purpose. Once science has to serve, not truth, but the
interests of a class, a community, or a state, the sole task of
argument and discussion is to vindicate and to spread still fur­
ther the beliefs by which the whole life of the community is
directed. As the Nazi Minister of Justice has explained, the ques­
tion which every new scientific theory must ask itself is: "Do I
serve National-Socialism for the greatest benefit of all?"
The word truth itself ceases to have its old meaning. It
describes no longer something to be found, with the individual
conscience as the sole arbiter of whether in any particular
instance the evidence (or the standing of those proclaiming it)
warrants a belief; it becomes something to be laid down by
authority, something which has to be believed in the interest of
the unity of the organised effort, and which may have to be
altered as the exigencies of this organised effort require it.
The general intellectual climate which this produces, the
spirit of complete cynicism as regards truth which it engenders,
the loss of the sense of even the meaning of truth, the disappear­
ance of the spirit of independent inquiry and of the belief in the
power of rational conviction, the way in which differences of
opinion in every branch of knowledge become political issues to
be decided by authority, are all things which one must person­
ally experience-no short description can convey their extent.
Perhaps the most alarming fact is that contempt for intellectual
liberty is not a thing which arises only once the totalitarian
system is established, but one which can be found everywhere
among intellectuals who have embraced a collectivist faith and
who are acclaimed as intellectual leaders even in countries still
under a liberal regime. Not only is even the worst oppression
condoned if it is committed in the name of socialism, and the
creation of a totalitarian system openly advocated by people who168 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
pretend to speak for the scientists of liberal countries; intoler­
ance too is openly extolled. Have we not recently seen a British
scientific writer defend even Inquisition because in his opinion
it "is beneficial to science when it protects a rising class"?l This
view is, of course, practically indistinguishable from the views
which led the Nazis to the persecution of men of science, the
burning of scientific books, and the systematic eradication of the
intelligentsia of the subjected people.
* * * * *
The desire to force upon the people a creed which is regarded as
salutary for them is, of course, not a thing that is new or peculiar
to our time. New, however, is the argument by which many of
our intellectuals try to justify such attempts. There is no real
freedom of thought in our society, so it is said, because the
opinions and tastes of the masses are shaped by propaganda, by
advertising, by the example of the upper classes, and by other
environmental factors which inevitably force the thinking of the
people into well-worn grooves. From this it is concluded that if
the ideals and tastes of the great majority are always fashioned by
circumstances which we can control, we ought to use this power
deliberately to turn the thoughts of the people in what we think
is a desirable direction.
Probably it is true enough that the great majority are rarely
capable of thinking independently, that on most questions they
accept views which they find ready-made, and that they will be
equally content if born or coaxed into one set of beliefs or
another. In any society freedom of thought will probably be of
direct significance only for a small minority. But this does not
mean that anyone is competent, or ought to have power, to select
those to whom this freedom is to be reserved. It certainly does
not justify the presumption of any group of people to claim the
I ]. G. Crowther, The Social Relationof Science, 1941 , p. 333.THEENDOFTRUTH 169
right to determine what people ought to think or believe. It
shows a complete confusion of thought to suggest that, because
under any sort of system the majority of people follow the lead
of somebody, it makes no difference if everybody has to follow
the same lead. To deprecate the value of intellectual freedom
because it will never mean for everybody the same possibility of
independent thought is completely to miss the reasons which
give intellectual freedom its value. What is essential to make it
serve its function as the prime mover of intellectual progress is
not that everybody may be able to think or write anything, but
that any cause or idea may be argued by somebody. So long as
dissent is not suppressed, there will always be some who will
query the ideas ruling their contemporaries and put new ideas
to the test of argument and propaganda.
This interaction of individuals, possessing different know­
ledge and different views, is what constitutes the life of thought.
The growth of reason is a social process based on the existence
of such differences. It is of its essence that its results cannot be
predicted, that we cannot know which views will assist this
growth and which will not-in short, that this growth cannot be
governed by any views which we now possess without at the
same time limiting it. To "plan" or "organise" the growth of
mind, or, for that matter, progress in general, is a contradiction
in terms. The idea that the human mind ought "consciously" to
control its own development confuses individual reason, which
alone can "consciously control" anything, with the inter­
personal process to which its growth is due. By attempting to
control it we are merely setting bounds to its development and
must sooner or later produce a stagnation of thought and a
decline of reason.
The tragedy of collectivist thought is that while it starts out to
make reason supreme, it ends by destroying reason because it
misconceives the process on which the growth of reason
depends. It may indeed be said that it is the paradox of all170 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
collectivist doctrine and its demand for the "conscious" control
or "conscious" planning that they necessarily lead to the
demand that the mind of some individual should rule
supreme-while only the individualist approach to social phe­
nomena makes us recognise the super-individual forces which
guide the growth of reason. Individualism is thus an attitude of
humility before this social process and of tolerance to other
opinions, and is the exact opposite of that intellectual hubris
which is at the root of the demand for comprehensive direction
of the social process.12
TH E SOCIALIST ROOTS
OF NAZISM
All anti-liberal forces are combining against everything that is
liberal.
A. Moellervan den Bruck.
It is a common mistake to regard National-Socialism as a mere
revolt against reason, an irrational movement without intel­
lectual background. If that were so, the movement would be
much less dangerous than it is. But nothing could be further
from the truth or more misleading. The doctrines of National­
Socialism are the culmination of a long evolution of thought, a
process in which thinkers who have had great influence far
beyond the confines of Germany have taken part. Whatever one
may think of the premises from which they started, it cannot be
denied that the men who produced the new doctrines were
powerful writers who left the impress of their ideas on the
whole of European thought. Their system was developed with
ruthless consistency. Once one accepts the premises from which172 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
it starts, there is no escape from its logic. It is simply collectivism
freed from all traces of an individualist tradition which might
hamper its realisation.
Though in this development German thinkers have taken the
lead, they were by no means alone. Thomas Carlyle and Houston
Stewart Chamberlain, Auguste Comte and Georges Sorel are as
much a part of that continuous development as any Germans.
The development of this strand of thought within Germany has
been well traced recently by Mr. R. D. Butler in his study of The
Roots of National Socialism. But although its persistence there
through a hundred and fifty years in almost unchanged and
ever-recurring form, which emerges from that study, is rather
frightening, it is easy to exaggerate the importance these ideas
had in Germany before 1914. They were only one strand of
thought among a people then perhaps more varied in its views
than any other. And they were on the whole represented by a
small minority and held in as great contempt by the majority of
Germans as they were in other countries.
What, then, caused these views held by a reactionary minority
finally to gain the support of the great majority of Germans and
practically the whole of her youth? It was not merely the defeat,
the suffering, and the wave of nationalism which led to their
success. Still less was the cause, as so many people wish to
believe, a capitalist reaction against the advance of socialism. On
the contrary, the support which brought these ideas to power
came precisely from the socialist camp. It was certainly not
through the bourgeoisie, but rather the absence of a strong
bourgeoisie, by which they were helped to power.
The doctrines which had guided the ruling elements in Ger­
many for the past generation were not opposed to the socialism
in Marxism, but to the liberal elements contained in it, its inter­
nationalism and its democracy. And as it became increasingly
clear that it was just these elements which formed obstacles to
the realisation of socialism, the socialists of the left approachedTHE SOCIALIST ROOTS OF NAZISM 173
more and more to those of the right. It was the union of the
anti -capitalist forces of the right and the left, the fusion of radical
and conservative socialism, which drove out from Germany
everything that was liberal.
The connection between socialism and nationalism in Ger­
many was close from the beginning. It is significant that the most
important ancestors of National~Socialism-Fichte, Rodbertus,
and Lassall-are at the same time acknowledged fathers of social­
ism. While theoretical socialism in its Marxist form was directing
the German labour movement, the authoritarian and nationalist
element receded for a time into the background. But not for
long.
1
From 1914 onwards there arose from the ranks of Marxist
socialism one teacher after another who led, not the conserva­
tives and reactionaries, but the hardworking labourer and idealist
youth into the national-socialist fold. It was only thereafter that
the tide of nationalist socialism attained major importance and
rapidly grew into the Hitlerian doctrine. The war hysteria of
1914, which, just because of the German defeat, was never fully
cured, is the beginning of the modern development which pro­
duced National-Socialism, and it was largely with the assistance
of old socialists that it rose during this period.
* * * * *
Perhaps the first, and in some ways the most characteristic,
representative of this development is the late Professor Werner
Sombart, whose notorious Handler und Helden (Merchants and
Heroes) appeared in 1915. Sombart had begun as a Marxian
socialist, and as late as 1909 could assert with pride that he had
devoted the greater part of his life to fighting for the ideas of Karl
I And only partially. In 1892 one of the leaders of the social-democratic party,
August Bebel, was able to tell Bismarck that "the Imperial Chancellor can rest
assured that German Social Democracy is a sort of preparatory school for
mili tarism" !174 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
Marx. He had done as much as any man to spread socialist ideas
and anti -capitalist resentment of varying shades throughout
Germany; and if German thought became penetrated with Marx­
ian elements in a way that was true of no other country till the
Russian revolution, this was in a large measure due to Sombart.
At one time he was regarded as the outstanding representative of
the persecuted socialist intelligentsia, unable, because of his
radical views, to obtain a University chair. And even after the last
war the influence, inside and outside Germany of his work as a
historian, which remained Marxist in approach after he had
ceased to be a Marxist in politics, was most extensive and is
particularly noticeable in the works of many of the English and
American planners.
In his war book this old socialist welcomed the "German
War" as the inevitable conflict between the commercial civilisa­
tion of England and the heroic culture of Germany. His con­
tempt for the "commercial" views of the English people, who
had lost all warlike instincts, is unlimited. Nothing is more
contemptible in his eyes than the universal striving after the
happiness of the individual; and what he describes as the leading
maxim of English morals: be just "that it may be well with thee
and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon the land" is to him
"the most infamous maxim which has ever been pronounced by
a commercial mind". The "German idea of the state" as formu­
lated by Fichte, Lassalle,and Rodbertus, is that the state is neither
founded nor formed by individuals, nor an aggregate of indi­
viduals, nor is its purpose to serve any interest of individuals. It
is a Volksgemeinschaftin which the individual has no rights but only
duties. Claims of the individual are always an outcome of the
commercial spirit. "The ideas of 1789"-Liberty, Equality
Fraternity-are characteristically commercial ideals which have
no other purpose but to secure certain advantages to individuals.
Before 1914 all the true German ideals of a heroic life were
in deadly danger before the continuous advance of EnglishTHE SOCIALIST ROOTS OF NAZISM 175
commercial ideals, English comfort, and English sport. The
English people had not only themselves become completely
corrupted, every trade unionist being sunk in the "morass of
comfort", but they had begun to infect all other peoples. Only
the war had helped the Germans to remember that they were
really a people of warriors, a people among whom all activities
and particularly all economic activities were subordinated to
military ends. Sombart knew that the Germans were held in
contempt by other people because they regard war as sacred­
but he glories in it. To regard war as inhuman and senseless is a
product of commercial views. There is a life higher than the
individual life, the life of the people and the life of the state, and it
is the purpose of the individual to sacrifice himself for that
higher life. War is to Sombart the consummation of the heroic
view of life, and the war against England is the war against the
opposite ideal, the commercial ideal of individual freedom and
of English comfort, which in his eyes finds its most contemptible
expression in-the safety-razors found in the English trenches.
* * * * *
If Sombart's outburst was at the time too much even for most
Germans, another German professor arrived at essentially the
same ideas in a more moderate and more scholarly, but for that
reason even more effective, form. Professor Johann Plenge was as
great an authority on Marx as Sombart. His book on Marx und Hegel
marks the beginning of the modern Hegel-renaissance among
Marxian scholars; and there can be no doubt about the genuinely
socialist nature of the convictions with which he started. Among
his numerous war publications the most important is a small but
at the time widely discussed book with the significant title: 1789
and 1914. The Symbolic Years in the History of the Political Mind. It is
devoted to the conflict between the "Ideas of 1789", the ideal of
freedom, and the "Ideas of 1914", the ideal of organisation.
Organisation is to him, as to all socialists who derive their176 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
socialism from a crude application of scientific ideals to the prob­
lems of society, the essence of socialism. It was, as he rightly
emphasises, the root of the socialist movement at its inception in
early nineteenth-century France. Marx and Marxism have
betrayed this basic idea of socialism by their fanatic but utopian
adherence to the abstract idea of freedom. Only now was the idea
of organisation again coming into its own, elsewhere, as wit­
nessed by the work of Mr. H. G. Wells (by whose Future in America
Professor Plenge was profoundly influenced, and whom he
describes as one of the outstanding figures of modern socialism),
but particularly in Germany, where it is best understood and most
fully realised. The war between England and Germany is therefore
really a conflict between two opposite principles. The "Economic
World War" is the third great epoch of spiritual struggle in
modern history. It is of equal importance with the Reformation
and the bourgeois revolution of liberty. It is the struggle for the
victory of the new forces born out of the advanced economic life
of the nineteenth century: socialism and organisation.
Because in the sphere of ideas Germany was the most con­
vinced exponent of all socialist dreams, and in the sphere of
reality she was the most powerful architect of the most highly
organised economic system.-In us is the twentieth century.
However the war may end, we are the exemplary people. Our
ideas will determine the aims of the life of humanity.-World
History experiences at present the colossal spectacle that with
us a new great ideal of life penetrates to final victory, while
at the same time in England one of the World-Historical
principles finally collapses.
The war economy created in Germany in 19 14
is the first realisation of a socialist society and its spirit the first
active, and not merely demanding, appearance of a socialistTHE SOCIALIST ROOTS OF NAZISM 177
spirit. The needs ofthe war have established the socialist idea in
German economic life, and thus the defence of our nation pro­
duced for humanity the idea of '9'4, the idea of German organ­
isation, the people's community (Volksgemeinschaft)of national
socialism .... Without our really noticing it the whole of our
political life in state and industry has risen to a higher stage.
State and economic life form a new unity.... The feeling of
economic responsibility which characterises the work of the
civil servant pervades all private activity.... The new German
corporative constitution of economic life [which Professor
Plenge admits is not yet ripe or complete] is the highest form of
life of the state which has ever been known on earth.
At first Professor Plenge still hoped to reconcile the ideal of
liberty and the ideal of organisation, although largely through
the complete but voluntary submission of the individual to the
whole. But these traces of liberal ideas soon disappear from his
writings. By 1918 the union between socialism and ruthless
power politics had become complete in his mind. Shortly before
the end of the war he exhorted his compatriots in the socialist
journal Die Glocke in the following manner:
It is high time to recognise the fact that socialism must be
power policy, because it is to be organisation. Socialism has to
win power: it must never blindly destroy power. And the most
important and critical question for socialism in the time of war
of peoples is necessarily this: what people is pre-eminently
summoned to power, because it is the exemplary leader in the
organisation of peoples?
And he forecast all the ideas which were finally to justify
Hitler's New Order:
Just from the point ofview ofsocialism, which is organisation,178 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
is not an absolute right of self-determination of the peoples the
right of individualistic economic anarchy? Are we willing to
grant complete self-determination to the individual in economic
life? Consistent socialism can accord to the people a right to
incorporation only in accordance with the real distribution of
forces historically determined.
* * * * *
The ideals which Plenge expressed so clearly were especially
popular among, and perhaps even derive from, certain circles of
German scientists and engineers who, precisely as is now so
loudly demanded by their English counterparts, clamoured for
the centrally planned organisation of all.aspects of life. Leading
among these was the famous chemist Wilhelm Ostwald, one of
whose pronouncements on this point has achieved a certain
celebrity. He is reported to have stated publicly that
Germany wants to organise Europe which up to now still
lacks organisation. I will explain to you now Germany's great
secret: we, or perhaps the German race, have discovered the
significance of organisation. While the other nations still live
under the regime of individualism, we have already achieved
that of organisation.
Ideas very similar to these were current in the offices of the
German raw material dictator, Walter Rathenau, who, although
he would have shuddered had he realised the consequences of his
totalitarian economics, yet deserves a considerable place in any
fuller history of the growth of Nazi ideas. Through his writings
he has probably, more than any other man, determined the eco­
nomic views of the generation which grew up in Germany dur­
ing and immediately after the last war; and some of his closest
collaborators were later to form the backbone of the staff of Goer­
ing's Five Year Plan administration. Very similar also was much ofTHE SOCIALIST ROOTS OF NAZISM 179
the teaching of another former Marxist, Friedrich Naumann,
whose Mitte1europareached probably the greatest circulation of any
war book in Germany.! But it was left to an active socialist politi­
cian, a member of the left wing of the social-democratic party in
the Reichstag, to develop these ideas most fully and to spread
them far and wide. Paul Lensch had already in earlier books
described the war as "the flight of the English bourgeoisie before
the advance of socialism", and explained how different were the
socialist ideal of freedom and the English conception. But only in
his third and most successful war book, his Three Years of World
Revolution,2 were his characteristic ideas, under the influence of
Plenge, to achieve full development. Lensch bases his argument
on an interesting and in many respects accurate historical account
ofhow the adoption of protection by Bismarck had made possible
in Germany a development towards that industrial concentration
and cartellisation which, from his Marxist standpoint, repre­
sented a higher state of industrial development.
The result of Bismarck's decision of the year 1879 was that
Germany took on the role of the revolutionary; that is to say, of
a state whose position in relation to the rest of the world is that
of a representative of a higher and more advanced economic
system. Having realised this, we should perceive that in the
present World Revolution Germany represents the revolutionary,
and her greatest antagonist, England, the counter-revolutionary
side. This fact proves how little the constitution of a country,
whether it be liberal and republican or monarchic and auto­
cratic, affects the question whether, from the point of view of
I A good summary of Naumann's views, as characteristic of the German com­
bination of Socialism and Imperialism as any we quote in the text, will be
found in R. D. Butler, The Roots of NationalSocialism, 1941, pp. 203-9.
2 Paul Lensch, Three Years of World Revolution.Preface by ]. E. M., London, 1918. The
English translation of this work was made available, still during the last war, by
some far-seeing person.180 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
historical development, that country is to be regarded as liberal
or not. Or, to put it more plainly, our conceptions of Liberalism,
Democracy, and so forth, are derived from the ideas of English
Individualism, according to which a state with a weak govern­
ment is a liberal state, and every restriction upon the freedom
of the individual is conceived as the product of autocracy and
militarism.
In Germany, the "historically appointed representative" of
this higher form of economic life,
the struggle for socialism has been extraordinarily simplified,
since all the prerequisite conditions of Socialism had already
become established there. And hence it was necessarily a vital
concern of any socialist party that Germany should triumph­
antly hold her own against her enemies, and thereby be able to
fulfil her historic mission of revolutionising the world. Hence
the war of the Entente against Germany resembled the attempt
of the lower bourgeoisie of the pre-capitalistic age to prevent
the decline of their own class.
That organisation of Capital [Lensch continues] which began
unconsciously before the war, and which during the war has
been continued consciously, will be systematically continued
after the war. Not through any desire for any arts of organisa­
tion nor yet because socialism has been recognised as a higher
principle of social development. The classes who are to-day the
practical pioneers of socialism are, in theory, its avowed
opponents, or, at any rate, were so up to a short time ago.
Socialism is coming, and in fact has to some extent already
arrived, since we can no longer live without it.
The only people who still oppose this tendency are the liberals.
This class of people, who unconsciously reason from
English standards, comprises the whole educated GermanTHE SOCIALIST ROOTS OF NAZISM 181
bourgeoisie. Their political notions of "freedom" and "civic
right", of constitutionalism and parliamentarianism, are
derived from that individualistic conception of the world, of
which English Liberalism is a classical embodiment, and which
was adopted by the spokesmen of the German bourgeoisie in
the 'fifties, 'sixties, and 'seventies of the nineteenth century. But
these standards are old-fashioned and shattered, just as old­
fashioned English Liberalism has been shattered by this war.
What has to be done now is to get rid of these inherited polit­
ical ideas and to assist the growth of a new conception of State
and Society. In this sphere also Socialism must present a con­
scious and determined opposition to individualism. In this
connection it is an astonishing fact that, in the so-called
"reactionary" Germany, the working classes have won for
themselves a much more solid and powerful position in the life
of the state than is the case either in England or in France.
Lensch follows this up with a consideration which again
contains much truth and which deserves to be pondered:
Since the Social Democrats, by the aid of this [universal] suf­
frage, occupied every post which they could obtain in the
Reichstag, the State Parliament, the municipal councils, the
courts forthe settlement oftrade disputes, the sick funds, and so
forth, they penetrated very deeply into the organism ofthe state;
but the price which they had to pay for this was that the state, in
its turn, exercised a profound influence upon the working
classes. To be sure, as the result of strenuous socialistic labours
for fifty years, the state is no longer the same as it was in the year
1867, when universal suffrage first came into operation; but
then, Social Democracy, in its turn, is no longer the same as it
was at the ti me. The state has undergonea processofsocialisation,
and Social Democracyhas undergonea processofnationalisation.
* * * * *182 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
Plenge and Lensch in turn have provided the leading ideas for
the immediate masters of National-Socialism, particularly
Oswald Spengler and A. Moeller van den Bruck, to mention only
the two best-known names. l
Opinions may differ in how far the
former can be regarded as a socialist. But that in his tract on
Prussianismand Socialism,which appeared in 1920, he merely gave
expression to ideas widely held by German socialists will now be
evident. A few specimens of his argument will suffice. "Old
Prussian spirit and socialist conviction, which to-day hate each
other with the hatred of brothers, are one and the same." The
representatives of Western civilisation in Germany, the German
liberals, are "the invisible English army which after the battle
of Jena, Napoleon left behind on German soil". To Spengler,
men like Hardenberg and Humboldt and all the other liberal
reformers were "English". But this "English" spirit will be
turned out by the German revolution which began in 1914.
The three last nations of the Occident have aimed at three
forms of existence, represented by famous watchwords: Free­
dom, Equality, Community. They appear in the political forms
of liberal Parliamentarianism, social Democracy, and authori­
tarian socialism.
2
••• The German, more correctly, Prussian,
instinct is: the power belongs to the whole .... Everyone is
I The same applies to many others of the intellectual leaders of the generation
which has produced Nazism, such as Othmar Spann, Hans Freyer, Carl Schmitt,
and Ernst Junger. On these compare the interesting study by Aurel Kolnai, The
War against the West, 1938, which suffers, however, from the defect that, by
confining itself to the post-war period when these ideals had already been
taken over by the nationalists, it overlooks their socialist creators.
2 This Spenglerian formula finds its echo in an often quoted statement of Carl
Schmitt, the leading Nazi expert on constitutional law, according to which the
evolution of government proceeds "in three dialectic stages : from the absolute
state of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries through the neutral state of the
liberal nineteenth century to the totalitarianstate in which state and society are
identical" (C. Schmitt, Der Hiiterder Verfassung,Tubingen, 1931, p. 79).THE SOCIALIST ROOTS OF NAZISM 183
given his place. One commands or obeys. This is, since the
eighteenth century, authoritarian socialism, essentially illiberal
and anti-democratic, in so far as English Liberalism and French
Democracy are meant. ... There are in Germany many hated
and ill-reputed contrasts, but liberalism alone is contemptible
on German soil.
The structure of the English nation is based on the distinc­
tion between rich and poor, that of the Prussian on that
between command and obedience. The meaning of class dis­
tinction is accordingly fundamentally different in the two
countries.
After pointing out the essential difference between the English
competitive system and the Prussian system of "economic
administration", and after showing (consciously following
Lensch) how since Bismarck the deliberate organisation of
economic activity had progressively assumed more socialist
forms, Spengler continues:
In Prussia there existed a real state in the most ambitious
meaning of the word. There could be, strictly speaking, no pri­
vate persons. Everybody who lived within the system that
worked with the precision of a clockwork, was in some way a
link in it. The conduct of public business could therefore not be
in the hands of private people, as is supposed by Parliamen­
tarianism. It was an Amt and the responsible politician was a
civil servant, a servant of the whole.
The "Prussian idea" requires that everybody should become a
state official, that all wages and salaries be fixed by the state. The
administration of all property, in particular, becomes a salaried
function. The state of the future will be a Beamtenstaat.But
the decisive question not only for Germany, but for the world,184 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
which must be solved by Germany for the world is: Is in future
trade to govern the state, or the state to govern trade? In the
face of this question Prussianism and Socialism are the same
... Prussianism and Socialism combat the England in our
midst.
It was only a step from this for the patron-saint of National­
Socialism Moeller van den Bruck to proclaim the World War a
war between liberalism and socialism: "We have lost the war
against the West. Socialism has lost it against Liberalism. U 1 As
with Spengler, liberalism is, therefore, the arch-enemy. Moeller
van den Bruck glories in the fact that
there are no liberals in Germany to-day; there are young revolu­
tionaries: there are young conservatives. But who would be a
liberal? ... Liberalism is a philosophy of life from which
German youth now turns with nausea, with wrath, with quite
peculiar scorn, for there is none more foreign, more repugnant,
more opposed to its philosophy. German youth to-day recognises
the liberal as the arch-enemy.
Moeller van den Bruck's Third Reich was intended to give the
Germans a socialism adapted to their nature and undefiled by
Western liberal ideas. And so it did.
These writers were by no means isolated phenomena. As early
as 1922 a detached observer could speak of a "peculiar and, on a
first glance, surprising phenomenon
u
then to be observed in
Germany:
The fight againstthe capitalistic order, accordingtothis view, is
I Moeller van den Bruck, Sozialismusund Aussenpolitik,1933, pp. 87, 90, and 100.
The articles here reprinted, particularly the article on "Lenin and Keynes"
which discusses most fully the contention discussed in the text, were first
published between 1919 and 1923.THE SOCIALIST ROOTS OF NAZISM 185
a continuation of the war against the Entente with the weapons
of the spirit and of economic organisation, the way which leads
to practical socialism, a return of the German people to their
best and noblest traditions.
1
Fight against liberalism in all its forms, liberalism that had
defeated Germany, was the common idea which united socialists
and conservatives in one common front. At first it was mainly
in the German Youth Movement, almost entirely socialist in
inspiration and outlook, where these ideas were most readily
accepted and the fusion of socialism and nationalism completed.
In the later 'twenties and till the advent to power of Hitler a
circle of young men gathered round the journal Die Tat and led
by Ferdinand Fried became the chief exponent of this tradition
in the intellectual sphere. Fried's Ende des Kapitalismusis perhaps the
most characteristic product of this group of Edelnazis,as they were
known in Germany, and is particularly disquieting because of
its resemblance to so much of the literature which we see in
England to-day, where we can watch the same drawing together
of the socialists of the Left and the Right, and nearly the same
contempt of all that is liberal in the old sense. "Conservative
Socialism" (and, in other circles, "Religious Socialism") was the
slogan under which a large number of writers prepared the
atmosphere in which "National-Socialism" succeeded. It is
"conservative socialism" which is the dominant trend in this
country now. Had the war against the Western powers "with the
weapons of the spirit and of economic organisation" not almost
succeeded before the real war began?
I K. Pribram, "Deutscher Nationalismus und Deutscher Sozialismus", in Archiv
fUr Sozialwissenschaftund Sozialpolitik,vol. 49,1922, pp. 298-9. The writer mentions
as further examples the philosopher Max Scheler preaching" the socialist world
mission of Germany", and the Marxist K. Korach writing on the spirit of the
new Volksgemeinschaft,as arguing in the same vein.13
THE TOTALITARIANS IN
OUR MIDST
When authority presents itself in the guise of organisation it
develops charms fascinating enough to convert communities
of free people into totalitarian States.
The Times.
Probably it is true that the very magnitude of the outrages com­
mitted by the totalitarian governments, instead of increasing the
fear that such a system might one day arise in this country, has
rather strengthened the assurance that it cannot happen here.
When we look to Nazi Germany the gulf which separates us
seems so immense that nothing that happens there can possess
relevance for any possible development in this country. And the
fact that the difference has steadily become greater seems to
refute any suggestion that we may be moving in a similar direc­
tion. But let us not forget that fifteen years ago the possibility of
such a thing happening in Germany would have appeared just as
fantastic, not only to nine-tenths of the Germans themselves, butTHE TOTALITARIANS IN OUR MIDST 187
also to the most hostile foreign observers (however wise they
may now pretend to have been).
As suggested earlier in these pages, however, it is not the
present Germany but the Germany of twenty or thirty years ago
to which conditions in this country show an ever-increasing
resemblance. There are many features which were then regarded
as "typically German" and which are now equally familiar in
this country, and many symptoms that point to a further devel­
opment in the same direction. We have already mentioned the
most significant, the increasing similarity between the economic
views of the Right and Left and their common opposition to the
Liberalism that used to be the common basis of most English
politics. We have the authority of Mr. Harold Nicolson for the
statement that during the last Conservative government, among
the back-benchers of the Conservative party "the most gifted ...
were all socialists at heart" 1 and there can be little question that,
as in the days of the Fabians, many socialists have more sympathy
with the Conservatives than with the Liberals. There are many
other features closely related to this. The increasing veneration
for the state, the admiration of power, and of bigness for bigness'
sake, the enthusiasm for "organisation" of everything (we now
call it planning), and that "inability to leave anything to the
simple power of organic growth", which even H. v. Treitschke
deplored in the Germans sixty years ago, are all scarcely less
marked in this country now than they were in Germany.
How far in the last twenty years England has travelled on the
German path is brought home to one with extraordinary vivid­
ness if one now reads some of the more serious discussions of
the differences between British and German views on political
and moral issues which appeared in this country during the last
war. It is probably true to say that then the British public had in
general a truer appreciation of these differences than it has now;
1 The Spectatort April 12, 1940 t p. 523.188 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
but while the people of this country were then proud of their
distinctive tradition, there are few of the political views then
regarded as characteristically English of which the majority of
people in this country do not now seem half ashamed, if they do
not positively repudiate them. It is scarcely an exaggeration to
say that the more typically English a writer on political or social
problems then appeared to the world, the more is he to-day
forgotten in his own country. Men like Lord Morley or Henry
Sidgwick, Lord Acton or A. V. Dicey, who were then admired in
the world at large as outstanding examples of the political wis­
dom of liberal England, are to the present generation largely
obsolete Victorians. Perhaps nothing shows this change more
clearly than that, while there is no lack of sympathetic treatment
of Bismarck in contemporary English literature, the name of
Gladstone is rarely mentioned by the younger generation
without a sneer over his Victorian morality and naive
utopianism.
I wish I could in a few paragraphs adequately convey the
alarming impression gained from the perusal of a few of the
English works on the ideas dominating the Germany of the last
war, where almost every word could be applied to the views
most conspicuous in current English literature. I shall merely
quote one brief passage by Lord Keynes, describing in 1915 the
"nightmare" which he found expounded in a typical German
work of that period: he describes how according to a German
author
even in peace industrial life must remain mobilised. This is
what he means by speaking of the "militarisation of our indus­
trial life" [the title of the work reviewed]. Individualism must
come to an end absolutely. A system of regulations must be set
up, the object of which is not the greater happiness of the
individual (Professor Jaffe is not ashamed to say this in so
many words), but the strengthening of the organised unity ofTHE TOTALITARIANS IN OUR MIDST 189
the state for the object of attaining the maximum degree of
efficiency (Leistungsfiihigheit),the influence of which on indi­
vidual advantage is only indirect.- This hideous doctrine is
enshrined in a sort of idealism. The nation will grow into a
"closed unity" and will become, in fact, what Plato declared it
should be-"Der Mensch im Grossen". In particular, the com­
ing peace will bring with it a strengthening of the idea of State
action in industry.... Foreign investment, emigration, the
industrial policy which in recent years had regarded the whole
world as a market, are too dangerous. The old order of industry,
which is dying to-day, is based on Profit; and the new Germany
of the twentieth-century Power without consideration of Profit
is to make an end of that system of Capitalism, which came
over from England one hundred years ago.'
Except that no English author has yet to my knowledge dared
openly to disparage individual happiness, is there a passage in
this which is not mirrored in much of contemporary English
literature?
And, undoubtedly, not merely the ideas which in Germany
and elsewhere prepared totalitarianism, but also many of the
principles of totalitarianism itself are what exercises an increas­
ing fascination in many other countries. Although few people, if
anybody, in this country would probably be ready to swallow
totalitarianism whole, there are few single features which we
have not yet been advised by somebody or other to imitate.
Indeed, there is scarcely a leaf out of Hitler's book which some­
body or other in this country has not recommended us to take
and use for our own purposes. This applies particularly to many
people who are undoubtedly Hitler's mortal enemies because of
one special feature in his system. We should never forget that the
anti-semitism of Hitler has driven from his country, or turned
I EconomicJournal, 1915, p. 450.190 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
into his enemies, many people who in every respect are con­
firmed totalitarians of the German type.
1
No description in general terms can give an adequate idea of
the similarity of much of current English political literature to
the works which destroyed the belief in Western civilisation in
Germany and created the state of mind in which Nazism could
become successful. The similarity is even more one of the tem­
per with which the problems are approached than of the specific
arguments used-a similar readiness to break all cultural ties
with the past and to stake everything on the success of a particu­
lar experiment. As was also true in Germany, most of the works
which are preparing the way for a totalitarian course in this
country are the product of sincere idealists and often of men of
considerable intellectual distinction. So, although it is invidious
to single out particular persons as illustrations where similar
views are advocated by hundreds of others, I see no other way of
demonstrating effectively how far this development has actually
advanced in this country. I shall deliberately choose as illustra­
tions authors whose sincerity and disinterestedness are above
suspicion. But though I hope in this way to show how the views
from which totalitarianism springs are now rapidly spreading
here, I stand little chance of conveying successfully the equally
I Especially when we consider the proportion of former socialists who have
become Nazis it is important to remember that the true significance of this
ratio is seen only if we compare it, not with the total number of former
socialists, but with the number of those whose conversion would not in any
case have been prevented by their ancestry. In fact, one of the surprising
features of the political emigration from Germany is the comparatively small
number of refugees from the Left who are not "Jews" in the German sense of
the term.-How often do we not hear eulogies of the German system prefaced
by some statement such as the following with which at a recent conference an
enumeration of the "features of the totalitarian technique of economic mobil­
isation which are worth thinking about" was introduced: "Herr Hitler is not
my ideal-far from it. There are very pressing personal reasons why Herr
Hitler should not be my ideal, but ... "TH E TOTALITAR IAN SIN OU R MIDST 191
important similarity in the emotional atmosphere. An extensive
investigation into all the subtle changes in thought and language
would be necessary to make explicit what one readily enough
recognises as symptoms of a familiar development. Through
meeting the kind of people who talk about the necessity of
opposing "big" ideas to "small" ones and of replacing the old
"static" or "partial" thinking by the new "dynamic" or "global"
way one learns to recognise that what at first appears sheer
nonsense is a sign of the same intellectual attitude with whose
manifestations we can alone concern ourselves here.
* * * * *
My first examples are two works by a gifted scholar, which in the
last few years have attracted much attention. There are, perhaps,
few other instances in contemporary English literature where
the influence of the specific German ideas with which we are
concerned is so marked as in Professor E. H. Carr's books on the
Twenty Years' Crisis and the Conditionsof Peace.
In the first of these two books Professor Carr frankly
confessed himself an adherent of "the 'historical school' of
realists [which] had its home in Germany and [whose]
development can be traced through the great names of Hegel
and Marx". A realist, he explains, is one "who makes morality a
function of politics" and who "cannot logically accept any
standard of value save that of fact". This "realism" is con­
trasted, in truly German fashion, with the "utopian" thought
dating from the eighteenth century "which was essentially
individualist in that it made the human conscience the final
court of appeal". But the old morals with their "abstract general
principles" must disappear because "the empiricist treats the
concrete case on its individual merits". In other words, nothing
but expediency matters, and we are even assured that "the rule
pacta sunt servanda is not a moral principle". That without abstract
general principles merit becomes solely a matter of arbitrary192 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
opinion, and that international treaties, if they are not morally
binding, have no meaning whatever, does not seem to worry
Professor Carr.
According to Professor Carr, indeed, although he does not
explicitly say so, it appears that England fought the last war on
the wrong side. Anyone who re-reads now the statements of
British war aims of twenty-five years ago and compares them
with Professor Carr's present views will readily see that what
were then believed to be the German views are now those of
Professor Carr who would presumably argue that the different
views then professed in this country were merely a product of
British hypocrisy. How little difference he is able to see between
the ideals held in this country and those practised by present -day
Germany is best illustrated by his assertion that
it is true that when a prominent National-Socialist asserts that
"anything that benefits the German people is right, anything
that harms them is wrong" he is merely propounding the same
identification of national interest with universal right which has
already been established for English-speaking countries by
[President] Wilson, Professor Toynbee, Lord Cecil, and many
others.
Since Professor Carr's books are devoted to international prob­
lems it is mainly in that field that their characteristic tendency
becomes apparent. But from the glimpses one gets of the char­
acter of the future society which he contemplates, it appears also
to be quite on the totalitarian model. Sometimes one even won­
ders whether the resemblance is accidental or deliberate. Does
Professor Carr, for example, realise, when he asserts that "we can
no longer find much meaning in the distinction familiar to
nineteenth-century thought between 'society' and 'state''', that
this is precisely the doctrine of Professor Carl Schmitt, the lead­
ing Nazi theoretician of totalitarianism, and, in fact, the essenceTHE TOTALITARIANS IN OUR MIDST 193
of the definition of totalitarianism which that author has given
to that term which he himself had introduced? Or that the view
that "the mass production of opinion is the corollary of the
mass-production of goods" and that, therefore, "the prejudice
which the word propaganda still exerts in many minds to-day is
closely parallel to the prejudice against control of industry and
trade" is really an apology for a regimentation of opinion of the
kind practised by the Nazis?
In his more recent Conditions of Peace Professor Carr answers
with an emphatic affirmative the question with which we
concluded the last chapter:
Thevictors lostthe peace, and Soviet Russiaand Germanywon
it, because the former continued to preach, and in part to apply,
the once valid, but now disruptive ideals of the rights of nations
and laissezfairecapitalism, whereas the latter, consciously or
unconsciously borne forward on the tide of the twentieth cen­
tury, were striving to build up the world in larger units under
centralised planning and control.
Professor Carr completely makes his own the German battle-cry
of the socialist revolution of the East against the liberal West in
which Germany was the leader:
the revolution which began in the last war, which has been
the driving force of every significant political movement in the
last twenty years ... a revolution against the predominant
ideas of the nineteenth century: liberal democracy, national
self-determination and laissezfaireeconomics.
As he himself rightly says "it was almost inevitable that this
challenge to nineteenth-century beliefs which she had never
really shared should find in Germany one of its strongest pro­
tagonists". With all the fatalistic belief of every pseudo-historian194 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
since Hegel and Marx this development is represented as inevit­
able: "we know the direction in which the world is moving, and
we must bow to it or perish."
The conviction that this trend is inevitable is characteristically
based on familiar economic fallacies-the presumed necessity of
the general growth of monopolies in consequence of techno­
logical developments, the alleged "potential plenty", and all the
other popular catchwords which appear in works of this kind.
Professor Carr is not an economist and his economic argument
generally will not bear serious examination. But neither this, nor
his belief characteristically held at the same time, that the
importance of the economic factor in social life is rapidly
decreasing, prevent him from basing on economic arguments all
his predictions about the inevitable developments or from pre­
senting as his main demands for the future "the reinterpretation
in predominantly economic terms of the democratic ideals of
'equality' and 'liberty'''!
Professor Carr's contempt for all the ideas of liberal econo­
mists (which he insists on calling nineteenth-century ideas,
though he knows that Germany "had never really shared" them
and had already in the nineteenth century practised most of the
principles he now advocates), is as profound as that of any of
the German writers quoted in the last chapter. He even takes over
the German thesis, originated by Friedrich List, that Free Trade
was a policy dictated solely by, and appropriate only to, the
special interests of England in the nineteenth century. Now,
however, "the artificial production of some degree of autarky is a
necessary condition of orderly social existence". To bring about
a "return to a more dispersed and generalised world trade ... by
a 'removal of trade barriers' or by a resuscitation of the laissez-faire
principles of the nineteenth century" is "unthinkable". The
future belongs to Grossraumwirtschaftof the German kind: "the
result which we desire can be won only by a deliberate reorgan­
isation of European life such as Hitler has undertaken"!THE TOTALITARIANS IN OUR MIDST 195
After all this one is hardly surprised to find a characteristic
section headed "The Moral Functions ofWar" ,in which Professor
Carr condescendingly pities "the well-meaning people (espe­
cially in English-speaking countries) who, steeped in the
nineteenth-century tradition, persist in regarding war as senseless
and devoid ofpurpose" , and rejoices in the" sense ofmeaning and
purpose" which war, "the most powerful instrument of social
solidarity" , creates. This is all very familiar-but it was not in the
works of English scholars that one expected to find these views.
* * * * *
Possibly we have not yet given enough attention to one feature
of the intellectual development in Germany during the last hun­
dred years which is now in an almost identical form making its
appearance in this country: the scientists agitating for a "scien­
tific" organisation of society. The ideal of a society organised
"through and through" from the top has in Germany been con­
siderably furthered by the quite unique influence which her
scientific and technological specialists were allowed to exercise
on the formation of social and political opinions. Few people
remember that in the modern history of Germany the political
professors have played a role comparable to that of the political
lawyers in France. 1 The influence of these scientist-politicians
was of late years not often on the side of liberty: the "intolerance
of reason" so frequently conspicuous in the scientific specialist,
the impatience with the ways of the ordinary man so character­
istic of the expert, and the contempt for anything which was not
consciously organised by superior minds according to a scien­
tific blueprint, were phenomena familiar in German public life
for generations before they became of significance in this coun­
try. And perhaps no other country provides a better illustration
1 cr. Franz Schnabel, Deutsche Geschichte im neunzehnten]ahrhundert,vol. 11, 1933,
p.204.196 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
of the effects on a nation of a general and thorough shift of the
greater part of its educational system from the "humanities" to
the "realities" than Germany between 1840 and 1940. 1
The way in which, in the end, with few exceptions, her
scholars and scientists put themselves readily at the service of the
new rulers is one of the most depressing and shameful spectacles
in the whole history of the rise of National-Socialism. 2 It is well
known that particularly the scientists and engineers, who had so
loudly claimed to be the leaders on the march to a new and
better world, submitted more readily than almost any other class
to the new tyranny.3
1 I believe it was the author of Leviathanwho first suggested that the teaching of
the classics should be suppressed, because it instilled a dangerous spirit of
liberty!
2 The servility of the scientists to the powers that be appeared early in Germany,
hand in hand with the great development of state-organised science which to­
day is the subject of so much eulogy in this country. One of the most famous of
German Scientists, the physiologist Emil du Bois-Reymond, was not ashamed,
in an oration delivered in 1870 in his double capacity of Rector of the Uni­
versity of Berlin and President of the Prussian Academy of Science, to proclaim
that "We, the University of Berlin, quartered opposite the King's palace, are, by
the deed of our foundation, the intellectual bodyguard of the House of Hohen­
zollern." (A Speech on the German War, London 1870, p. 31.-It is remarkable that
du Bois-Reymond should have thought it advisable to issue an English edition
of this oration.)
3 It will suffice to quote one foreign witness: Mr. R. A. Brady, in his study of The
Spirit and Structureof German Fascism, concludes his detailed account of the devel­
opment in the German academic world with the statement that "the scientist,
per se, is hence, perhaps, the most easily used and 'coordinated' of all the
especially trained people in modem society. The Nazis, to be true, fired a good
many University professors, and dismissed a good many scientists from
research laboratories. But the professors were primarily among the social sci­
ences where there was more common awareness of and a more persistent
criticism of the Nazi programmes, and not among the natural sciences where
thinking is supposed to be most rigorous. Those dismissed in this latter field
were primarily Jewish or exceptions to the generalisations made above,
because of the equally uncritical acceptance of beliefs running contrary to NaziTHE TOTALITARIANS IN OUR MIDST 197
The role which the intellectuals played in the totalitarian
transformation of society was prophetically foreseen in another
country by Julien Benda, whose Trahison des CJeres assumes new
significance when one now re-reads it, fifteen years after it has
been written. There is particularly one passage in that work
which deserves to be well pondered and kept in mind when we
come to consider certain examples of the excursions of British
scientists into politics. It is the passage in which M. Benda speaks
of the
superstition of science held to be competent in all domains,
including that of morality; a superstition which, I repeat, is an
acquisition of the nineteenth century. It remains to discover
whether those who brandish this doctrine believe in it or
whether they simply want to give the prestige of a scientific
appearance to passions of their hearts, which they perfectly
know are nothing but passions. It is to be noted that the dogma
that history is obedient to scientific laws is preached especially
by partisans of arbitrary authority. This is quite natural, since it
eliminates the two realities they most hate, i.e. human liberty
and the historical action of the individual.
We have already had occasion to mention one English product
of this kind, a work in which, on a Marxist background, all the
characteristic idiosyncrasies of the totalitarian intellectual, a
hatred of almost everything which distinguishes European civil­
isation since the Renaissance, is combined with an approval of
the methods of Inquisition. We do not wish to consider here
such an extreme case and shall take a work which is more
representative and which has achieved considerable publiCity.
views.--Consequently the Nazis were able to 'co-ordinate' scholars and
scientists with relative ease, and hence to throw behind their elaborate propa­
ganda the seeming weight of the bulk of German learned opinion and
support."198 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
Dr. C. H. Waddington's little book under the characteristic title
The Scientific Attitude is as good an example as any of a class of
literature which is actively sponsored by the influential weekly
Nature and which combines claims for greater political power for
the scientists with an ardent advocacy of wholesale "planning".
Though not quite as outspoken in his contempt for freedom as
Mr. Crowther, Dr. Waddington is hardly more reassuring. He
differs from most of the writers of the same kind in that he
clearly sees and even emphasises that the tendencies he describes
and supports inevitably lead to a totalitarian system. Yet appar­
ently this appears to him preferable to what he describes as "the
present ferocious monkey-house civilisation".
Dr. Waddington's claim that the scientist is qualified to run a
totalitarian society is based mainly on his thesis that" science can
pass ethical judgment on human behaviour", a claim to the
elaboration of which by Dr. Waddington Nature has given con­
siderable publicity. It is, of course, a thesis which has long been
familiar to the German scientist-politicians and which has justly
been singled out by ]. Benda. For an illustration of what this
means we do not need to go outside Dr. Waddington's book.
Freedom, he explains, "is a very troublesome concept for the
scientist to discuss, partly because he is not convinced that, in
the last analysis, there is such a thing". Nevertheless we are told
that "science recognises" this and that kind of freedom, but "the
freedom to be odd and unlike one's neighbour is not ... a
scientific value". Apparently the "harlot humanities", about
which Dr. Waddington has to say many uncomplimentary
things, have gravely misled us in teaching us tolerance!
That when it comes to social and economic questions this
book on the "scientific attitude" is anything but scientific is what
one has learnt to expect of this kind of literature. We find again
all the familiar cliches and baseless generalisations about "poten­
tial plenty" and the inevitable tendency towards monopoly,
though the "best authorities" quoted in support of theseTHE TOTALITARIANS IN OUR MIDST 199
contentions prove on examination to be mostly political tracts of
questionable scientific standing, while the serious studies of the
same problems are conspicuously neglected.
As in almost all works of this type, Dr. Waddington's convic­
tions are largely determined by his belief in "inevitable historical
tendencies" which science is presumed to have discovered and
which he derives from "the profound scientific philosophy" of
Marxism whose basic notions are" almost, if not quite, identical
with those underlying the scientific approach to nature" and
which his "competence to judge" tells Dr. Waddington are an
advance on anything which has gone before. Thus Dr. Wad­
dington, though he finds it "difficult to deny that England now
is a worse country to live in than it was" in 1913, looks forward
to an economic system which "will be centralised and totalitar­
ian in the sense that all aspects of the economic development of
large regions are consciously planned as an integrated whole".
And for his facile optimism that in this totalitarian system free­
dom of thought will be preserved, his "scientific attitude" has
no better counsel than the conviction that "there must be very
valuable evidence about questions which one does not need to
be an expert to understand", such as, for example, whether it is
possible "to combine totalitarianism with freedom of thought".
* * * * *
A fuller survey of the various tendencies towards totalitarianism
in this country would have to give considerable attention to the
various attempts to create some kind of middle-class socialism
bearing no doubt unknown to their authors an alarming resem­
blance to similar developments in pre-Hitler Germany.l If we
1 Another element which after this war is likely to strengthen the tendencies in
this direction will be some of the men who during the war have tasted the
powers of coercive control and will find it difficult to reconcile themselves
with the humbler roles they will then have to play. Though after the last war
men of this kind were not as numerous as they will probably be in the future,200 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
were concerned here with political movements proper we should
have to consider such new organisations as the "Forward March"
or "Common Wealth" movement of Sir Richard Acland, the
author of UnserKampf, or the activities of the "1941 Committee" of
Mr. J. B. Priestley, at one time associated with the former. But,
though it would be unwise to disregard the symptomatic signifi­
cance of such phenomena as these, they can hardly yet be counted
as important political forces. Apart from the intellectual influ­
ences which we have illustrated by two instances, the impetus of
the movement towards totalitarianism comes mainly from the
two great vested interests, organised capital and organised labour.
Probably the greatest menace of all is the fact that the policies of
these two most powerful groups point in the same direction.
They do this through their common, and often concerted,
support of the monopolistic organisation of industry; and it is
this tendency which is the great immediate danger. While there
is no reason to believe that this movement is inevitable, there can
be little doubt that if we continue on the path we have been
treading, it will lead us to totalitarianism.
This movement is, of course, deliberately planned mainly by
the capitalist organisers of monopolies, and they are thus one of
the main sources of this danger. Their responsibility is not
altered by the fact that their aim is not a totalitarian system but
rather a sort of corporative society in which the organised indus­
tries would appear as semi-independent and self-governing
"estates". But they are as short-sighted as were their German
colleagues in believing that they will be allowed not only to
create but also for any length of time to run such a system. The
decisions which the managers of such an organised industry
they exercised even then a not inconsiderable influence on the economic policy
of this country. It was in the company of some of these men that as long as ten
or twelve years ago I first experienced in this country the then still unusual
sensation of being suddenly transported into what I had learnt to regard as a
thoroughly "German", intellectual atmosphere.TH E TOTALITAR IAN SIN OU R MIDST 201
would constantly have to make are not decisions which any
society will long leave to private individuals. A state which
allows such enormous aggregations of power to grow up cannot
afford to let this power rest entirely in private control. Nor is the
belief any less illusory that in such conditions the entrepreneurs
will be long allowed to enjoy the favoured position which in a
competitive society is justified by the fact that of the many who
take the risks only a few achieve the success the chances of
which make the risk worth taking. It is not surprising that entre­
preneurs should like to enjoy both the high income which in a
competitive society the successful ones among them gain, and
the security of the civil servant. So long as a large sector of
private industry exists side by side with the government-run
industry great industrial talent is likely to command high salaries
even in fairly secure positions. But while the entrepreneurs may
well see their expectations borne out during a transition stage, it
will not be long before they will find, as their German colleagues
did, that they are no longer masters but will in every respect
have to be satisfied with whatever power and emoluments the
government will concede them.
Unless the argument of this book has been completely mis­
understood, the author will not be suspected of any tenderness
towards the capitalists if he stresses here that it would neverthe­
less be a mistake to put the blame for the modern movement
towards monopoly exclusively or mainly on that class. Their
propensity in this direction is neither new nor would it by itself
be likely to become a formidable power. The fatal development
was that they have succeeded in enlisting the support of an ever­
increasing number of other groups and with their help to obtain
the support of the state.
In some measure the monopolists have gained this support
either by letting other groups participate in their gains or, and
perhaps even more frequently, by persuading them that the for­
mation of monopolies was in the public interest. But the change202 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
in public opinion which through its influence on legislation and
judicature! has been the most important factor to make this
development possible, is more than anything the result of the
propaganda against competition by the Left. Very frequently
even measures aimed against the monopolists in fact serve only
to strengthen the power of monopoly. Every raid on the gains of
monopoly, be it in the interest of particular groups or of the
state as a whole, tends to create new vested interests which will
help to bolster up monopoly. A system in which large privileged
groups profit from the gains of monopoly may be politically
much more dangerous, and monopoly in such a system certainly
is much more powerful, than in one where the profits go to a
limited few. But though it should be clear that, for example, the
higher wages which the monopolist is in a position to pay are
just as much the result of exploitation as his own profit, and are
just as certain to make poorer not only all the consumers but still
more all other wage earners, not merely those who benefit from
it but the public generally nowadays accept the ability to pay
higher wages as a legitimate argument in favour of monopoly. 2
There is serious reason for doubt whether even in those cases
where monopoly is inevitable the best way of controlling it is to
put it in the hands of the state. If only a single industry were in
question this might well be so. But when we have to deal with
many different monopolistic industries, there is much to be said
I Cf. on this the recent instructive article on "Monopoly and the Law", by
W Arthur Lewis, in The Modern Law Review, vol. VI, no. 3, April 1943.
2 Even more surprising, perhaps, is the remarkable tenderness which many
socialists are apt to show towards the rentier bondholder to whom monopolist
organisation of industry frequently guarantees secure incomes. That their blind
enmity to profits should lead people to represent effortless fixed income as
socially or ethically more desirable than profits, and to accept even monopoly
to secure such a guaranteed income to, for example, railway bondholders, is
one of the most extraordinary symptoms of the perversion of values which has
taken place during the last generation.THE TOTALITARIANS IN OUR MIDST 203
for leaving them in different private hands rather than combin­
ing them under the single control of the state. Even if railways,
road and air transport, or the supply of gas and electricity, were
all inevitably monopolies, the consumer is unquestionably in a
much stronger position so long as they remain separate monop­
olies than when they are "co-ordinated" by a central control.
Private monopoly is scarcely ever complete and even more rarely
of long duration or able to disregard potential competition.
But a state monopoly is always a state-protected monopoly­
protected against both potential competition and effective criti­
cism. It means in most instances that a temporary monopoly is
given the power to secure its position for all time-a power
almost certain to be used. Where the power which ought to
check and control monopoly becomes interested in sheltering
and defending its appointees, where for the government to rem­
edy an abuse is to admit responsibility for it, and where criticism
of the actions of monopoly means criticism of the government,
there is little hope of monopoly becoming the servant of the
community. A state which is entangled in all directions in the
running of monopolistic enterprise, while it would possess
crushing power over the individual, would yet be a weak state in
so far as its freedom in formulating policy is concerned. The
machinery of monopoly becomes identical with the machinery
of the state, and the state itself becomes more and more identi­
fied with the interests of those who run things than with the
interests of the people in general.
The probability is that wherever monopoly is really inevitable
the plan which used to be preferred by the Americans, of a
strong state control over private monopolies, if consistently pur­
sued, offers a better chance of satisfactory results than state man­
agement. This would at least seem to be so where the state
enforces a stringent price control which leaves no room for
extraordinary profits in which others than the monopolists can
participate. Even if this should have the effect (as it sometimes204 THE R0 AD TO S E RFDO M
had with American public utilities) that the services of the mon­
opolistic industries would become less satisfactory than they
might be, this would be a small price to pay for an effective
check on the powers of monopoly. Personally I should much
prefer to have to put up with some such inefficiency than have
organised monopoly control my ways of life. Such a method of
dealing with monopoly, which would rapidly make the position
of the monopolist the least eligible among entrepreneurial posi­
tions, would also do as much as anything to reduce monopoly to
the spheres where it is inevitable and to stimulate the invention
of substitutes which can be provided competitively. Only make
the position of the monopolist once more that of the whipping
boy of economic policy and you will be surprised how quickly
most of the abler entrepreneurs will rediscover their taste for the
bracing air of competition!
* * * * *
The problem of monopoly would not be as difficult as it is if it
were only the capitalist monopolist whom we have to fight.
But, as has already been said, monopoly has become the danger
that it is, not through the efforts of a few interested capitalists,
but through the support they have obtained from those whom
they have let share in their gains, and from the many more
whom they have persuaded that in supporting monopoly they
assist in the creation of a more just and orderly society. The
fatal turning point in the modern development was when the
great movement which can serve its original ends only by
fighting all privilege, the Labour Movement, came under the
influence of anti-competition doctrines and became itself
entangled in the strife for privilege. The recent growth of
monopoly is largely the result of a deliberate collaboration of
organised capital and organised labour where the privileged
groups of labour share in the monopoly profits at the expense
of the community and particularly at the expense of theTHE TOTALITARIANS IN OUR MIDST 205
poorest, those employed in the less well organised industries
and the unemployed.
It is one of the saddest spectacles of our time to see a great
democratic movement support a policy which must lead to the
destruction of democracy and which meanwhile can benefit
only a minority of the masses who support it. Yet it is this
support from the Left of the tendencies towards monopoly
which make them so irresistible and the prospects of the future
so dark. So long as Labour continues to assist in the destruction
of the only order under which at least some degree of independ­
ence and freedom has been secured to every worker, there is
indeed little hope for the future. The Labour leaders who now
proclaim so loudly that they have "done once and for all with the
mad competitive system" 1 are proclaiming the doom of the
freedom of the individual. There is no other possibility than
either the order governed by the impersonal discipline of the
market or that directed by the will of a few individuals; and
those who are out to destroy the first are wittingly or unwit­
tingly helping to create the second. Even though some work­
men will perhaps be better fed, and all will no doubt be more
uniformly dressed in that new order, it is permissible to
doubt whether the majority of English workmen will in the end
thank the intellectuals among their leaders who have presented
them with a socialist doctrine which endangers their personal
freedom.
To anyone who is familiar with the history of the major Con­
tinental countries in the last twenty-five years, the study of the
recent programme of the Labour Party, now committed to the
creation of a "planned society" is a most depressing experience.
1 Professor H. ]. Laski, in his address to the 41 st Annual Labour Party Confer­
ence, London, May 26, 1942 (Report,p. 111). It deserves to be noted that accord­
ing to Professor Laski it is "this mad competitive system which spells poverty
for all peoples, and war as outcome of that poverty" -a curious reading of the
history of the last hundred and fifty years.206 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
To "any attempt to restore traditional Britain" there is opposed a
scheme which not only in general outline but also in detail and
even wording is indistinguishable from the socialist dreams
which dominated German discussion twenty-five years ago. Not
only demands, like those of the resolution, adopted on Professor
Laski's motion, which requires the retention in peace time of the
"measures of Government control needed for mobilising the
national resources in war", but all the characteristic catchwords,
such as the "balanced economy" which Professor Laski now
demands for Great Britain, or the "community consumption"
towards which production is to be centrally directed, are bodily
taken over from the German ideology. Twenty-five years ago
there was perhaps still some excuse for holding the naive belief
"that a planned society can be a far more free society than the
competitive laissez-faireorder it has come to replace".1 But to find
it once more held after twenty-five years of experience and the
re-examination of the old beliefs to which this experience has
led, and at a time when we are fighting the results of those very
doctrines, is tragic beyond words. That the great party which in
Parliament and public opinion has largely taken the place of the
progressive parties of the past, should have ranged itself with
what, in the light of all past development, must be regarded as a
reactionary movement, is the decisive change which has taken
place in our time and the source of the mortal danger to every­
thing a liberal must value. That the advances of the past should
be threatened by the traditionalist forces of the Right is a phe­
nomenon of all ages which need not alarm us. But if the place of
the opposition, in public discussion as well as in Parliament,
should become lastingly the monopoly of a second reactionary
party, there would indeed be no hope left.
1 The Old World and the New Society, an Interim Report of the National Executive of
the British Labour Party on the Problems of Reconstruction, pp. 12 and 16.14
MATERIAL CONDITIONS AND
IDEAL ENDS
Is it just or reasonable, that most voices against the main end
of government should enslave the less number that would be
free? More just it is, doubtless, if it come to force, that a less
number compel a greater to retain, which can be no wrong to
them, their liberty, than that a greater number, for the pleas­
ure of their baseness, compel a less most injuriously to be
their fellow slaves. They who seek nothing but their own just
liberty, have always the right to win it, whenever they have the
power, be the voices never so numerous that oppose it.
John Milton.
Our generation likes to flatter itself that it attaches less weight to
economic considerations than did its parents or grandparents.
The "End of Economic Man" bids fair to become one of the
governing myths of our age. Before we accept this claim, or treat
the change as praiseworthy, we must inquire a little further how
far it is true. When we consider the claims for social reconstruc­
tion which are most strongly pressed it appears that they are208 TH E ROAD TO SERFDOM
almost all economic in character: we have seen already that the
"re-interpretation in economic terms" of the political ideals of
the past, of liberty, equality, and security, is one of the main
demands of people who at the same time proclaim the end of
economic man. Nor can there be much doubt that in their
beliefs and aspirations men are to-day more than ever before
governed by economic doctrines, by the carefully fostered belief
in the irrationality of our economic system, by the false asser­
tions about "potential plenty", pseudo-theories about the inevit­
able trend towards monopoly, and the impression created by
certain much advertised occurrences such as the destruction of
stocks of raw materials or the suppression of inventions, for
which competition is blamed, though they are precisely the
sort of thing which could not happen under competition and
which are made possible only by monopoly and usually by
government-aided monopoly.l
In a different sense, however, it is no doubt true that our
generation is less willing to listen to economic considerations
than was true of its predecessors. It is most decidedly unwilling
to sacrifice any of its demands to what are called economic
arguments, it is impatient and intolerant of all restraints on their
immediate ambitions, and unwilling to bow to economic neces­
sities. It is not any contempt for material welfare, or even any
diminished desire for it, but, on the contrary, a refusal to recog­
nise any obstacles, any conflict with other aims which might
I The frequent use that is made of the occasional destruction of wheat, coffee,
etc., as an argument against competition is a good illustration of the intellectual
dishonesty of much of this argument, since a little reflection will show that in a
competitive market no owner of such stocks can gain by their destruction. The
case of the alleged suppression of useful patents is more complicated and
cannot be adequately discussed in a note; but the conditions in which it would
be profitable to put into cold storage a patent which in the social interest ought to be
used are so exceptional that it is more than doubtful whether this has happened
in any important instance.MATERIAL CONDITIONS AND IDEAL ENDS 209
impede the fulfilment of their own desires, which distinguishes
our generation. Economophobia would be a more correct
description of this attitude than the doubly misleading "End of
Economic Man", which suggests a change from a state of affairs
which has never existed in a direction in which we are not
moving. Man has come to hate, and to revolt against, the
impersonal forces to which in the past he submitted even
though they have often frustrated his individual efforts.
This revolt is an instance of a much more general phenom­
enon, a new unwillingness to submit to any rule or necessity the
rationaleof which man does not understand; it makes itself felt in
many fields of life, particularly in that of morals; and it is often a
commendable attitude. But there are fields where this craving for
intelligibility cannot be fully satisfied and where at the same
time a refusal to submit to anything we cannot understand must
lead to the destruction of our civilisation. Though it is natural
that, as the world around us becomes more complex, our resist­
ance grows against the forces which, without our understanding
them, constantly interfere with individual hopes and plans, it is
just in these circumstances that it becomes less and less possible
for anyone fully to understand these forces. A complex civilisa­
tion like ours is necessarily based on the individual adjusting
himself to changes whose cause and nature he cannot under­
stand: why he should have more or less, why he should have to
move to another occupation, why some things he wants should
become more difficult to get than others, will always be con­
nected with such a multitude of circumstances that no single
mind will be able to grasp them; or, even worse, those affected
will put all the blame on an obvious immediate and avoidable
cause, while the more complex interrelationships which deter­
mine the change remain inevitably hidden to them. Even the
director of a completely planned society, if he wanted to give an
adequate explanation to anyone why he has to be directed to a
different job, or why his remuneration has to be changed, could210 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
not fully do so without explaining and vindicating his whole
plan-which means, of course, that it could not be explained to
more than a few.
It was men's submission to the impersonal forces of the mar­
ket that in the past has made possible the growth of a civilisation
which without this could not have developed; it is by thus sub­
mitting that we are every day helping to build something that is
greater than anyone of us can fully comprehend. It does not
matter whether men in the past did submit from beliefs which
some now regard as superstitious: from a religious spirit of
humility, or an exaggerated respect for the crude teachings of
the early economists. The crucial point is that it is infinitely more
difficult rationally to comprehend the necessity of submitting to
forces whose operation we cannot follow in detail, than to do so
out of the humble awe which religion, or even the respect for
the doctrines of economics, did inspire. It may indeed be the
case that infinitely more intelligence on the part of everybody
would be needed than anybody now possesses, if we were even
merely to maintain our present complex civilisation without
anybody having to do things of which he does not comprehend
the necessity. The refusal to yield to forces which we neither
understand nor can recognise as the conscious decisions of an
intelligent being is the product of an incomplete and therefore
erroneous rationalism. It is incomplete because it fails to com­
prehend that the co-ordination of the multifarious individual
efforts in a complex society must take account of facts no indi­
vidual can completely survey. And it fails to see that, unless this
complex society is to be destroyed, the only alternative to sub­
mission to the impersonal and seemingly irrational forces of the
market is submission to an equally uncontrollable and therefore
arbitrary power of other men. In his anxiety to escape the irk­
some restraints which he now feels, man does not realise that the
new authoritarian restraints which will have to be deliberately
imposed in their stead will be even more painful.MATERIAL CONDITIONS AND IDEAL ENDS 211
Those who argue that we have to an astounding degree
learned to master the forces of nature but are sadly behind in
making successful use of the possibilities of social collaboration
are quite right so far as this statement goes. But they are mistaken
when they carry the comparison further and argue that we must
learn to master the forces of society in the same manner in
which we have learnt to master the forces of nature. This is not
only the path to totalitarianism, but the path to the destruction
of our civilisation and a certain way to block future progress.
Those who demand it show by their very demands that they have
not yet comprehended the extent to which the mere preservation
of what we have so far achieved depends on the co-ordination of
individual efforts by impersonal forces.
* * * * *
We must now return briefly to the crucial point, that individual
freedom cannot be reconciled with the supremacy of one single
purpose to which the whole society must be entirely and per­
manently subordinated. The only exception to the rule that a free
society must not be subjected to a single purpose is war and
other temporary disasters when subordination of almost every­
thing to the immediate and pressing need is the price at which
we preserve our freedom in the long run. This explains also why
so many of the fashionable phrases about doing for the purposes
of peace what we have learnt to do for the purposes of war are so
very misleading: it is sensible temporarily to sacrifice freedom in
order to make it more secure in the future; but the same cannot
be said for a system proposed as a permanent arrangement.
That no single purpose must be allowed in peace to have
absolute preference over all others applies even to the one aim
which everybody now agrees comes in the front rank: the con­
quest of unemployment. There can be no doubt that this must be
the goal of our greatest endeavour; even so, it does not mean that
such an aim should be allowed to dominate us to the exclusion212 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
of everything else, that, as the glib phrase runs, it must be
accomplished "at any price". It is, in fact, in this field that the
fascination of vague but popular phrases like "full employment"
may well lead to extremely short-sighted measures, and where
the categorical and irresponsible "it must be done at all cost" of
the single-minded idealist is likely to do the greatest harm.
It is of very great importance that we should approach with
open eyes the task which in this field we shall have to face after
the war, and that we should clearly realise what we may hope to
achieve. One of the dominant features of the immediate post­
war situation will be that the special needs of war have drawn
hundreds of thousands of men and women into specialised jobs
where during the war they have been able to earn relatively high
wages. There will, in many instances, be no possibility of
employing the same numbers in these particular trades. There
will be an urgent need for the transfer of large numbers to other
jobs, and many of them will find that the work they can then get
is less favourably remunerated than was true of their war job.
Even re-training, which certainly ought to be provided on a
liberal scale, cannot entirely overcome this problem. There will
still be many people who, if they are to be paid according to
what their services will then be worth to society, would under
any system have to be content with a lowering of their material
position relative to that of others.
If, then, the trade unions successfully resist any lowering of
the wages of the particular groups in question, there will be only
two alternatives open: either coercion will have to be used, Le.
certain individuals will have to b~ selected for compulsory trans­
fer to other and relatively less well paid positions, or those who
can no longer be employed at the relatively high wages they have
earned during the war must be allowed to remain unemployed
till they are willing to accept work at a relatively lower wage.
This is a problem which would arise in a socialist society no less
than in any other; and the great majority of workmen wouldMATERIAL CON DITIONS AN D I DEAL EN DS 213
probably be just as little inclined to guarantee in perpetuity their
present wages to those who were drawn into specially well paid
employments because of the special need of war. A socialist
society would certainly use coercion in this position. The point
that is relevant for us is that if we are determined not to allow
unemployment at any price, and are not willing to use coercion,
we shall be driven to all sorts of desperate expedients, none of
which can bring any lasting relief and all of which will seriously
interfere with the most productive use of our resources. It
should be specially noted that monetary policy cannot provide a
real cure for this difficulty except by a general and considerable
inflation, sufficient to raise all other wages and prices relatively
to those which cannot be lowered, and that even this would
bring about the desired result only by effecting in a concealed
and underhand fashion that reduction of real wages which could
not be brought about directly. Yet to raise all other wages and
incomes to an extent sufficient to adjust the position of the
group in question would involve an inflationary expansion on
such a scale that the disturbances, hardships, and injustices
caused would be much greater than those to be cured.
This problem, which will arise in a particularly acute form
after the war, is one which will always be with us so long as the
economic system has to adapt itself to continuous changes.
There will always be a possible maximum of employment in the
short run which can be achieved by giving all people employ­
ment where they happen to be and which can be achieved by
monetary expansion. But not only can this maximum be main­
tained solely by progressive inflationary expansion and with the
effect of holding up those redistributions of labour between
industries made necessary by the changed circumstances, and
which so long as workmen are free to choose their jobs will
always come about only with some delays and thereby cause
some unemployment: to aim always at the maximum of
employment achievable by monetary means is a policy which is214 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
certain in the end to defeat its own purposes. It tends to lower
the productivity of labour and thereby constantly increases the
proportion of the working population which can be kept
employed at present wages only by artificial means.
* * * * *
There is little doubt that after the war wisdom in the manage­
ment of our economic affairs will be even more important than
before and that the fate of our civilisation will ultimately depend
on how we solve the economic problems we shall then face. We
shall at first be poor, very poor indeed-and the problem of
regaining and improving our former standards may in fact prove
for Great Britain more difficult than for many other countries. If
we act wisely there is little question that by hard work and by
devoting a considerable part of our efforts to overhauling and
renewing our industrial apparatus and organisation, we shall in
the course of a few years be able to return to, and even to
surpass, the level we had reached. But this presupposes that we
shall be satisfied to consume currently no more than is possible
without impairing the task of reconstruction, that no exagger­
ated hopes create irresistible claims for more than this, and that
we regard it as more important to use our resources in the best
manner and for the purposes where they contribute most to our
well-being than that we should use all our resources somehow. 1
Perhaps no less important is that we should not, by short-sighted
I This is perhaps the place to emphasise that, however much one may wish a
speedy return to a free economy, this cannot mean the removal at one stroke of
most of the wartime restrictions. Nothing would discredit the system of free
enterprise more than the acute, though probably short-lived, dislocation and
instability such an attenlpt would produce. The problem is at what kind of
system we should aim in the process of demobilisation, not whether the war­
time system should be transformed into more permanent arrangements by a
carefully thought-out policy of gradual relaxation of controls, which may have
to extend over several years.MATERIAL CONDITIONS AND IDEAL ENDS 215
attempts to cure poverty by a redistribution instead of by an
increase in our income, so depress large classes as to turn them
into determined enemies of the existing political order. It should
never be forgotten that the one decisive factor in the rise of totali­
tarianism on the Continent, which is yet absent in this country, is
the existence of a large recently dispossessed middle class.
Our hopes of avoiding the fate which threatens must indeed to
a large extent rest on the prospect that we can resume rapid
economic progress which, however low we may have to start,
will continue to carry us upwards; and the main condition for
such progress is that we should all be ready to adapt ourselves
quickly to a very much changed world, that no considerations for
the accustomed standard of particular groups must be allowed to
obstruct this adaptation, and that we learn once more to turn all
our resources to wherever they contribute most to make us all
richer. The adjustments that will be needed if we are to recover
and surpass our former standards will be greater than any similar
adjustments we had to make in the past; and only if everyone of
us is ready individually to obey the necessities of this readjust­
ment shall we be able to get through a difficult period as free
men who can choose their own way of life. Let a uniform min­
imum be secured to everybody by all means; but let us admit at
the same time that with this assurance of a basic minimum all
claims for a privileged security of particular classes must lapse,
that all excuses disappear for allowing groups to exclude
newcomers from sharing their relative prosperity in order to
maintain a special standard of their own.
It may sound noble to say: damn economics, let us build up a
decent world-but it is, in fact, merely irresponsible. With our
world as it is, with everyone convinced that the material
conditions here or there must be improved, our only chance of
building a decent world is that we can continue to improve the
general level of wealth. The one thing modern democracy will
not bear without cracking is the necessity of a substantial216 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
lowering of the standards of living in peace time or even
prolonged stationariness of its economic conditions.
* * * * *
People who admit that present political trends constitute a
serious threat to our economic prospects, and through their
economic effects endanger much higher values, are yet apt to
deceive themselves that we are making material sacrifices to gain
ideal ends. It is, however, more than doubtful whether a fifty
years' approach towards collectivism has raised our moral stand­
ards, or whether the change has not rather been in the opposite
direction. Though we are in the habit of priding ourselves on
our more sensitive social conscience, it is by no means clear that
this is justified by the practice of our individual conduct. On the
negative side, in its indignation about the inequities of the exist­
ing social order, our generation probably surpasses most of its
predecessors. But the effect of that movement on our positive
standards in the proper field of morals, individual conduct, and
on the seriousness with which we uphold moral principles
against the expediencies and exigencies of social machinery, is a
very different matter.
Issues in this field have become so confused that it is necessary
to go back to fundamentals. What our generation is in danger of
forgetting is not only that morals are of necessity a phenomenon
of individual conduct, but also that they can exist only in the
sphere in which the individual is free to decide for himself and
called upon voluntarily to sacrifice personal advantage to the
observance of a moral rule. Outside the sphere of individual
responsibility there is neither goodness nor badness, neither
opportunity for moral merit nor the chance of proving one's
conviction by sacrificing one's desires to what one thinks right.
Only where we ourselves are responsible for our own interests
and are free to sacrifice them, has our decision moral value. We
are neither entitled to be unselfish at someone else's expense,MATERIAL CONDITIONS AND IDEAL ENDS 217
nor is there any merit in being unselfish if we have no choice.
The members of a society who in all respects are made to do the
good thing have no title to praise. As Milton said: "If every action
which is good or evil in a man of ripe years were under pittance
and prescription and compulsion, what were virtue but a name,
what praise should then be due to well-doing, what gramercy to
be sober, just, or continent?"
Freedom to order our own conduct in the sphere where
material circumstances force a choice upon us, and responsibility
for the arrangement of our own life according to our own con­
science, is the air in which alone moral sense grows and in which
moral values are daily re-created in the free decision of the indi­
vidual. Responsibility, not to a superior, but to one's conscience,
the awareness of a duty not exacted by compulsion, the necessity
to decide which of the things one values are to be sacrificed to
others, and to bear the consequences of one's own decision, are
the very essence of any morals which deserve the name.
That in this sphere of individual conduct the effect of col­
lectivism has been almost entirely destructive, is both inevitable
and undeniable. A movement whose main promise is the relief
from responsibilityl cannot but be anti-moral in its effect,
1 This becomes more and more clearly expressed as socialism approaches totali­
tarianism, and in this country is most explicitly stated in the programme of that
latest and most totalitarian form of English socialism, Sir Richard Acland's
"Common-Wealth" movement. The main feature of the new order he promises
is that in it the community will "say to the individual 'Don't you bother about
the business of getting your own living'." In consequence, of course, "it must
be the community as a whole which must decide whether or not a man shall
be employed upon our resources, and how and when and in what manner he
shall work", and that the community will have "to run camps for shirkers in
very tolerable conditions". Is it surprising that the author discovers that Hitler
"has stumbled across (or has needed to make use of) a small part, or perhaps
one should say one particular aspect of, what will ultimately be required of
humanity"? (Sir Richard Acland, Bt., The ForwardMarch, 1941, pp. 127, 126, 135,
and 32).218 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
however lofty the ideals to which it owes its birth. Can there be
much doubt that the feeling of personal obligation to remedy
inequities, where our individual power permits, has been weak­
ened rather than strengthened, that both the willingness to bear
responsibility and the consciousness that it is our own individual
duty to know how to choose have been perceptibly impaired?
There is all the difference between demanding that a desirable
state of affairs should be brought about by the authorities or
even being willing to submit provided everyone else is made to
do the same, and the readiness to do what one thinks right
oneself at the sacrifice of one's own desires and perhaps in the
face of hostile public opinion. There is much to suggest that we
have in fact become more tolerant towards particular abuses, and
much more indifferent to inequities in individual cases, since we
have fixed our eyes on an entirely different system in which the
state will set everything right. It may even be, as has been
suggested, that the passion for collective action is a way in which
we now without compunction collectively indulge in that
selfishness which as individuals we had learnt a little to restrain.
It is true that the virtues which are less esteemed and practised
now-independence, self-reliance, and the willingness to bear
risks, the readiness to back one's own conviction against a
majority, and the willingness to voluntary co-operations with
one's neighbours-are essentially those on which the working of
an individualist society rests. Collectivism has nothing to put in
their place, and in so far as it already has destroyed them it has left
a void filled by nothing but the demand for obedience and the
compulsion of the individual to do what is collectively decided
to be good. The periodical election ofrepresentatives, to which the
moral choice ofthe individual tends to be more and more reduced,
is not an occasion on which his moral values are tested or where he
has constantly to reassert and prove the order of his values, and to
testify to the sincerity of his profession by the sacrifice of those of
his values he rates lower to those he puts higher.MATERIAL CONDITIONS AND IDEAL ENDS 219
As the rules of conduct evolved by individuals are the source
from which collective political action derives what moral stand­
ards it possesses, it would indeed be surprising if the relaxation
of the standards of individual conduct were accompanied by a
raising of the standards of social action. That there have been
great changes is clear. Every generation, of course, puts some
values higher and some lower than its predecessors. Which,
however, are the aims which take a lower place now, which are
the values which we are now warned may have to give way if
they come into conflict with others? Which kind of values figure
less prominently in the picture of the future held out to us by the
popular writers and speakers than they did in the dreams and
hopes of our fathers? It is certainly not material comfort, cer­
tainly not a rise in our standard of living or the assurance of a
certain status in society which ranks lower. Is there a popular
writer or speaker who dares to suggest to the masses that they
might have to make sacrifices of their material prospects for the
enhancement of an ideal end? Is it not, in fact, entirely the other
way round? Are not the things which we are more and more
frequently taught to regard as "nineteenth-century illusions" all
moral values-liberty and independence, truth and intellectual
honesty, peace and democracy, and the respect for the individual
qua man instead of merely as the member of an organised
group? What are the fixed poles now which are regarded as
sacrosanct, which no reformer dare touch, since they are treated
as the immutable boundaries which must be respected in any
plan for the future? They are no longer the liberty of the indi­
vidual, his freedom of movement, and scarcely that of speech.
They are the protected standards of this or that group, their
"right" to exclude others from providing their fellow-men with
what they need. Discrimination between members and non­
members of closed groups, not to speak of nationals of different
countries, is accepted more and more as a matter of course;
injustices inflicted on individuals by government action in the220 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
interest of a group are disregarded with an indifference hardly
distinguishable from callousness; and the grossest violations of
the most elementary rights of the individual, such as are
involved in the compulsory transfer of populations, are more
and more often countenanced even by supposed liberals. All this
surely indicates that our moral sense has been blunted rather
than sharpened. When we are reminded, as more and more
frequently happens, that one cannot make omelettes without
breaking eggs, the eggs which are broken are almost all of the
kind which a generation or two ago were regarded as the essen­
tial bases of civilised life. And what atrocities committed by
powers with whose professed principles they sympathise have
not been readily condoned by many of our so-called "liberals"?
* * * * *
There is one aspect of the change in moral values brought about
by the advance of collectivism which at the present time pro­
vides special food for thought. It is that the virtues which are
held less and less in esteem and which consequently become
rarer are precisely those on which the British people justly
prided themselves and in which they were generally recognised
to excel. The virtues possessed by the British people possessed in
a higher degree than most other people, excepting only a few
of the smaller nations, like the Swiss and the Dutch, were
independence and self-reliance, individual initiative and local
responsibility, the successful reliance on voluntary activity,
non-interference with one's neighbour and tolerance of the
different and queer, respect for custom and tradition, and a
healthy suspicion of power and authority. British strength,
British character, and British achievements are to a great extent
the result of a cultivation of the spontaneous. But almost all the
traditions and institutions in which British moral genius has
found its most characteristic expression, and which in turn have
moulded the national character and the whole moral climate ofMATERIAL CONDITIONS AND IDEAL ENDS 221
England, are those which the progress of collectivism and its
inherently centralistic tendencies are progressively destroying.
A foreign background is sometimes helpful in seeing more
clearly to what circumstances the peculiar excellencies of the
moral atmosphere of a nation are due. And if one who, whatever
the law may say, must for ever remain a foreigner, may be
allowed to say so, it is one of the most disheartening spectacles
of our time to see to what extent some of the most precious
things which England has given to the world are now held in
contempt in England herself. The English hardly know to what
degree they differ from most other people in that they all,
irrespective of party, hold to a greater or less extent the ideas
which in their most pronounced form are known as liberalism.
Compared with most other peoples only twenty years ago
almost all Englishmen were liberals-however much they may
have differed from party Liberalism. And even to-day the English
conservative or socialist, no less than the liberal, if he travels
abroad, though he may find the ideas and writings of Carlyle or
Disraeli, of the Webbs or H. G. Wells, exceedingly popular in
circles with which he has little in common, among Nazis and
other totalitarians, if he finds an intellectual island where the
tradition of Macaulay and Gladstone, of J. S. Mill or John Morley
lives, will find kindred spirits who "talk the same language" as
himself-however much he himself may differ from the ideals
for which these men speCifically stood.
Nowhere is the loss of the belief in the specific values of
British civilisation more manifest, and nowhere has it had a
more paralysing effect on the pursuit of our immediate great
purpose than in the fatuous ineffectiveness of most British
propaganda. The first prerequisite for success in propaganda
directed to other people is the proud acknowledgment of the
characteristic values and distinguishing traits for which the
country attempting it is known to the other peoples. The main
cause of the ineffectiveness of British propaganda is that those222 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
directing it seem to have lost their own belief in the peculiar
values of English civilisation or to be completely ignorant of the
main points on which it differs from that of other people. The
Left intelligentsia, indeed, have so long worshipped foreign gods
that they seem to have become almost incapable of seeing any
good in the characteristic English institutions and traditions.
That the moral values on which most of them pride themselves
are largely the product of the institutions they are out to destroy,
these socialists cannot, of course, admit. And this attitude is
unfortunately not confined to avowed socialists. Though one
must hope that this is not true of the less vocal but more numer­
ous cultivated Englishmen, if one were to judge by the ideas
which find expression in current political discussion and propa­
ganda the Englishmen who not only "the language speak that
Shakespeare spake", but also "the faith and morals hold that
Milton held" seem to have almost vanished. 1
To believe, however, that the kind of propaganda produced by
this attitude can have the desired effect on our enemies and
particularly the Germans, is a fatal blunder. The Germans know
this country, not well, perhaps, yet suffiCiently to know what are
the characteristic traditional values of British life, and what for
the past two or three generations has increasingly separated the
minds of the two countries. If we wish to convince them, not
only of our sincerity, but also that we have to offer a real alterna­
tive to the way they have gone, it will not be by concessions to
their system of thought. We shall not delude them with a stale
reproduction of the ideas of their fathers which we have
I Though the subject of this chapter has already invited more than one refer­
ence to Milton, it is difficult to resist the temptation to add here one more
quotation, a very familiar one, though one, it seems, which nowadays nobody
but a foreigner would dare to cite: "Let not England forget her precedence of
teaching nations how to live." It is, perhaps, significant that our generation has
seen a host of American and English detractors of Milton-and that the first of
them, Mr. Ezra Pound, was during this war broadcasting from Italy!MATERIAL CONDITIONS AND IDEAL ENDS 223
borrowed from them-be it state-socialism, "Realpolitik" ,
"scientific" planning, or corporatism. We shall not persuade
them by following them half the way which leads to totalitarian­
ism. If the English themselves abandon the supreme ideal of the
freedom and happiness of the individual, if they implicitly admit
that their civilisation is not worth preserving, and that they know
nothing better than to follow the path along which the Germans
have led, they have indeed nothing to offer. To the Germans all
these are merely belated admissions that the British have been
wrong all the way through, and that they themselves are leading
the way to a new and better world, however appalling the period
of transition may be. The Germans know that what they still
regard as the British tradition and their own new ideals are
fundamentally opposed and irreconcilable views of life. They
might be convinced that the way they have chosen was wrong­
but nothing will ever convince them that the British will be
better guides on the German path.
Least of all will that type of propaganda appeal to those Ger­
mans on whose help we must ultimately count in rebuilding
Europe because their values are nearest to our own. For experi­
ence has made them wiser and sadder men: they have learnt that
neither good intentions nor efficiency of organisation can pre­
serve decency in a system in which personal freedom and indi­
vidual responsibility are destroyed. What the German and Italian
who have learned the lesson above all want is protection against
the monster state-not grandiose schemes for organisation on a
colossal scale, but opportunity peacefully and in freedom to
build up once more his own little world. It is not because they
believe that to be ordered about by the British is preferable to
being ordered about by the Prussians, but because they believe
that in a world where British ideals have been victorious they
will be less ordered about and left in peace to pursue their
own concerns, that we can hope for support from some of the
nationals of the enemy countries.224 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
If we are to succeed in the war of ideologies and to win over
the decent elements in the enemy countries, we must first of all
regain the belief in the traditional values for which this country
stood in the past, and must have the moral courage stoutly to
defend the ideals which our enemies attack. Not by shamefaced
apologies and by assurances that we are rapidly reforming, not
by explaining that we are seeking some compromise between
the traditional English values and the new totalitarian ideas, shall
we win confidence and support. Not the latest improvements we
may have effected in our social institutions, which count but
little compared with the basic differences of two opposed ways
of life, but our unwavering faith in those traditions which have
made this country a country of free and upright, tolerant and
independent people, is the thing that counts.15
THE PROSPECTS OF
INTERNATIONAL ORDER
Of all checks on democracy, federation has been the most
efficacious and the most congenial. ... The federal system
limits and restrains the sovereign power by dividing it and by
assigning to Government only certain defined rights. It is the
only method of curbing not only the majority but the power of
the whole people.
Lord Acton.
In no other field has the world yet paid so dearly for the aban­
donment of nineteenth-century liberalism as in the field where
the retreat began: in international relations. Yet only a small part
of the lesson which experience ought to have taught us has been
learnt. Perhaps even more than elsewhere current notions of
what is desirable and practicable are here still of a kind which
may well produce the opposite of what they promise.
The part of the lesson of the recent past which is slowly and
gradually being appreCiated is that many kinds of economic
planning, conducted independently on a national scale, are226 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
bound in their aggregate effect to be harmful even from a purely
economic point of view, and in addition to produce serious
international friction. That there is little hope of international
order or lasting peace so long as every country is free to employ
whatever measures it thinks desirable in its own immediate
interest, however damaging they may be to others, needs little
emphasis now. Many kinds of economic planning are indeed
practicable only if the planning authority can effectively shut out
all extraneous influences; the result of such planning is therefore
inevitably the piling up of restrictions on the movements of men
and goods.
Less obvious but by no means less real are the dangers to
peace arising out of the artificially fostered economic solidarity
of all the inhabitants of anyone country, and from the new
blocks of opposed interests created by planning on a national
scale. It is neither necessary nor desirable that national boundar­
ies should mark sharp differences in standards of living, that
membership of a national group should entitle to a share in a
cake altogether different from that in which members of other
groups share. If the resources of different nations are treated as
exclusive properties of these nations as wholes, if international
economic relations, instead of being relations between indi­
viduals, become increasingly relations between whole nations
organised as trading bodies, they inevitably become the source
of friction and envy between whole nations. It is one of the most
fatal illusions that by substituting negotiations between states
or organised groups for competition for markets or for raw
materials, international friction would be reduced. This would
merely put a contest of force in the place of what can only
metaphorically be called the "struggle" of competition, and
transfer to powerful and armed states, subject to no superior law,
the rivalries which between individuals had to be decided with­
out recourse to force. Economic transactions between national
bodies who are at the same time the supreme judges of theirTHE PROSPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ORDER 227
own behaviour, who bow to no superior law, and whose repre­
sentatives cannot be bound by any considerations but the
immediate interest of their respective nations, must end in
clashes of power. 1
If we were to make no better use of victory than to counten­
ance existing trends in this direction, only too visible before
1939, we might indeed find that we have defeated National­
Socialism merely to create a world of many national socialisms,
differing in detail, but all equally totalitarian, nationalistic, and
in recurrent conflict with each other. The Germans would appear
as the disturbers of peace, as they already do to some people,2
merely because they were the first to take the path along which
all the others were ultimately to follow.
* * * * *
Those who at least partly realise these dangers usually draw the
conclusion that economic planning must be done "internation­
ally", Le. by some super-national authority. But though this
would avert some of the obvious dangers raised by planning on a
national scale, it seems that those who advocate such ambitious
schemes have little conception of the even greater difficulties and
dangers which their proposals create. The problems raised by a
conscious direction of economic affairs on a national scale
inevitably assume even greater dimensions when the same is
attempted internationally. The conflict between planning and
freedom cannot but become more serious as the similarity of
standards and values among those submitted to a unitary plan
diminishes. There need be little difficulty in planning the eco­
nomic life of a family, comparatively little in a small community.
1 On all these and on the following points, which can be touched upon only
very briefly, see Professor Lionel Robbins's EconomicPlanningand InternationalOrder,
1937, passim.
2 See particularly the significant book by James Burnham, The Managerial
Revolution, 1941 .228 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
But as the scale increases, the amount of agreement on the order
of ends decreases and the necessity to rely on force and compul­
sion grows. In a small community common views on the relative
importance of the main tasks, agreed standards of value, will
exist on a great many subjects. But their number will become
less and less the wider we throw the net: and as there is less
community of views, the necessity to rely on force and coercion
increases.
The people of anyone country may easily be persuaded to
make a sacrifice in order to assist what they regard as "their" iron
industry or "their" agriculture, or in order that in their country
nobody should sink below a certain level. So long as it is a ques­
tion of helping people whose habits of life and ways of thinking
are familiar to us, of correcting the distribution of incomes
among, or the working conditions of, people we can well
imagine and whose views on their appropriate status are funda­
mentally similar to ours, we are usually ready to make some
sacrifices. But one has only to visualise the problems raised by
economic planning of even an area such as Western Europe to see
that the moral bases for such an undertaking are completely
lacking. Who imagines that there exist any common ideals of
distributive justice such as will make the Norwegian fisherman
consent to forgo the prospect of economic improvement in order
to help his Portuguese fellow, or the Dutch worker to pay more
for his bicycle to help the Coventry mechanic, or the French
peasant to pay more taxes to assist the industrialisation of Italy?
If most people are not willing to see the difficulty this is
mainly because, consciously or unconsciously, they assume that
it will be they who will settle these questions for the others, and
because they are convinced of their own capacity to do this justly
and equitably. English people, perhaps even more than others,
begin to realise what such schemes mean only when it is
presented to them that they might be a minority in the
planning authority, and that the main lines of the futureTHE PROSPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ORDER 229
economic development of Great Britain might be determined by
a non-British majority. How many people in this country would
be prepared to submit to the decision of an international author­
ity, however democratically constituted, which had power to
decree that the development of the Spanish iron industry must
have precedence over similar development in South Wales, that
the optical industry had better be concentrated in Germany to
the exclusion of Great Britain, or that only fully refined
petrol should be imported to Great Britain and all the industries
connected with refining reserved for the producer countries?
To imagine that the economic life of a vast area comprising
many different people can be directed or planned by democratic
procedure betrays a complete lack of awareness of the problems
such planning would raise. Planning on an international scale,
even more than is true on a national scale, cannot be anything
but a naked rule of force, an imposition by a small group on all
the rest of that sort of standard and employment which the
planners think suitable for the rest. If anything is certain it is that
Grossraumwirtschaftof the kind at which the Germans have been
aiming can be successfully realised only by a master race, a
Herrenvolk,ruthlessly imposing its aims and ideas on the rest. It is
a mistake to regard the brutality and the disregard of all the
wishes and ideals of the smaller people shown by the Germans
simply as a sign of their special wickedness; it is the nature of the
task they have assumed which makes these things inevitable. To
undertake the direction of the economic life of people with
widely divergent ideals and values is to assume responsibilities
which commit one to the use of force; it is to assume a position
where the best intentions cannot prevent one from being forced
to act in a way which to some of those affected must appear
highly immoral. 1
1 The experience in the colonial sphere, of this country as much as of any other,
has amply shown that even the mild forms of planning which we know as230 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
This is true even if we assume the dominant power to be as
idealistic and unselfish as we can possibly conceive. But how
small is the likelihood that it will be unselfish, and how great are
the temptations! I believe the standards of decency and fairness,
particularly with regard to international affairs, to be as high, if
not higher, in this than in any other country. Yet even now we
can hear people arguing that victory must be used to create
conditions in which British industry will be able to utilise to the
full the particular equipment which it has built up during the
war, that the reconstruction of Europe must be so directed as to
fit in with the special requirements of the industries of this
country, and to secure to everybody in this country the kind of
employment for which he thinks himself most fit. The alarming
thing about these suggestions is not that they are made, but that
they are made in all innocence and regarded as a matter of
course by decent people who are completely unaware of the
moral enormity which the use of force for such purposes
involves.1
* * * * *
colonial development involve, whether we wish it or not, the imposition of
certain values and ideals on those whom we try to assist. It is, indeed, this
experience which has made even the most internationally minded of colonial
experts so very sceptical of the practicability of an "international" administra­
tion of colonies.
1 If anyone should still fail to see the difficulties, or cherish the belief that with
a little good will they can all be overcome, it will help if he tries to follow the
implications of central direction of economic activity applied on a world scale.
Can there be much doubt that this would mean a more or less conscious
endeavour to secure the dominance of the white man, and would rightly be so
regarded by all other races? Till I find a sane person who seriously believes that
the European races will voluntarily submit to their standard of life and rate of
progress being determined by a World Parliament, I cannot regard such plans
as anything but absurd. But this does unfortunately not preclude that particular
measures, which could be justified only if the principle of world direction
were a feasible ideal, are seriously advocated.THE PROSPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ORDER 231
Perhaps the most powerful agent in creating the belief in the
possibility of a single central direction by democratic means of
the economic life of many different peoples is the fatal delusion
that if the decisions were left to the "people" , the community of
interest of the working classes would readily overcome the dif­
ferences which exist between the ruling classes. There is every
reason to expect that with world planning the clash of economic
interests which arises now about the economic policy of anyone
nation would in fact appear in even fiercer form as a clash of
interests between whole peoples which could be decided only
by force. On the questions which an international planning
authority would have to decide, the interests and opinions of the
working classes of the different people will inevitably be as
much in conflict, and there will be even less of a commonly
accepted basis for an equitable settlement, than there is with
respect to different classes in anyone country. To the worker in a
poor country the demand of his more fortunate colleague to be
protected against his low wage competition by minimum wage
legislation, supposedly in his interest, is frequently no more than
a means to deprive him of his only chance to better his condi­
tions by overcoming natural disadvantages by working at wages
lower than his fellows in other countries. And to him the fact
that he has to give the product of ten hours of his labour for
the product of five hours of the man elsewhere who is better
equipped with machinery is as much "exploitation" as that
practised by any capitalist.
It is fairly certain that in a planned international system the
wealthier and therefore most powerful nations would to a very
much greater degree than in a free economy become the object
of hatred and envy of the poorer ones: and the latter, rightly or
wrongly, would all be convinced that their position could be
improved much more quickly if they were only free to do what
they wished. Indeed, if it comes to be regarded as the duty of
the international authority to bring about distributive justice232 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
between the different peoples, it is no more than a consistent
and inevitable development of socialist doctrine that class strife
would become a struggle between the working classes of the
different countries.
There is at present a great deal of muddle-headed talk about
"planning to equalise standards of life". It is instructive to con­
sider in a little more detail one of these proposals to see what
precisely it involves. The area for which at the present moment
our planners are particularly fond of drawing up such schemes is
the Danube Basin and South-Eastern Europe. There can be no
doubt about the urgent need for amelioration of economic con­
ditions in this region, from humanitarian and economic con­
siderations as well as in the interest of the future peace of
Europe, nor that this can be achieved only in a political setting
different from that of the past. But this is not the same thing as to
wish to see economic life in this region to be directed according
to a single master plan, to foster the development of the different
industries according to a schedule laid down beforehand in a
way which makes the success of local initiative dependent on
being approved by the central authority and being incorporated
in its plan. One cannot, for example, create a kind of "Tennessee
Valley Authority" for the Danube Basin without thereby deter­
mining beforehand for many years to come the relative rate of
progress of the different races inhabiting this area, or without
subordinating all their individual aspirations and wishes to this
task.
Planning of this kind must of necessity begin by fixing an
order of priorities of the different claims. To plan for the deliber­
ate equalisation of standards of living means that the different
claims must be ranked according to merit, that some must be
given precedence over others, and that the latter must wait their
turn-even though those whose interests are thus relegated may
be convinced, not only of their better right, but also of their
ability to reach their goal sooner if they were only givenTHE PROSPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ORDER 233
freedom to act on their own devices. There exists no basis which
allows us to decide whether the claims of the poor Rumanian
peasant are more or less urgent than those of the still poorer
Albanian, or the needs of the Slovakian mountain shepherd
greater than those of his Slovenian colleague. But if the raising of
their standards of life is to be effected according to a unitary
plan, somebody must deliberately balance the merits of all these
claims and decide between them. And once such a plan is put
into execution, all the resources of the planned area must serve
that plan-there can be no exemption for those who feel they
could do better for themselves. Once their claim has been given a
lower rank, they will have to work for the prior satisfaction of
the needs of those who have been given preference. In such a
state of affairs everybodywill rightly feel that he is worse off than
he might be if some other plan had been adopted, and that it is
the decision and the might of the dominant powers which have
condemned him to a place less favourable than he thinks is due
to him. To attempt such a thing in a region peopled by small
nations, each of which believes equally fervently in its own
superiority over the others, is to undertake a task which can be
performed only by the use of force. What it would amount to in
practice is that British decisions and British power would have to
settle whether the standards of the Macedonian or the Bulgarian
peasant should be raised faster, whether the Czech or the Hun­
garian miner should more rapidly approach Western standards.
It does not need much knowledge of human nature, and cer­
tainly only a little knowledge of the people of Central Europe, to
see that whatever the decision imposed, there will be many,
probably a majority, to whom the particular order chosen will
appear supreme injustice, and that their common hatred will
soon turn against the power which, however disinterestedly, in
fact decides their fate.
Though there are no doubt many people who honestly believe
that if they were allowed to handle the job they would be able to234 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
settle all these problems justly and impartially, and who would
be genuinely surprised to find suspicion and hatred turning
against them, they would probably be the first to apply force
when those whom they mean to benefit prove recalcitrant, and
to show themselves quite ruthless in coercing people in what is
presumed to be their own interests. What these dangerous ideal­
ists do not see is that where the assumption of a moral responsi­
bility involves that one's moral views should by force be made to
prevail over those dominant in other communities, the assump­
tion of such responsibility may place one in a position in which
it becomes impossible to act morally. To impose such an impos­
sible moral task on the victorious nations is a certain way
morally to corrupt and discredit them.
By all means let us assist the poorer people as much as we can
in their own efforts to build up their lives and to raise their
standards of living. An international authority can be very just
and contribute enormously to economic prosperity if it merely
keeps order and creates conditions in which the people can
develop their own life; but it is impossible to be just or to let
people live their own life if the central authority doles out raw
materials and allocates markets, if every spontaneous effort has
to be "approved" and nothing can be done without the sanction
of the central authority.
* * * * *
After the discussions in earlier chapters it is hardly necessary to
stress that these difficulties cannot be met by conferring on the
various international authorities "merely" specific economic
powers. The belief that this is a practical solution rests on the
fallacy that economic planning is merely a technical task, which
can be solved in a strictly objective manner by experts, and that the
really vital things would still be left in the hands of the political
authorities. Anyinternational economic authority, not subject to a
superior political power, even if strictly confined to a particularTHE PROSPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ORDER 235
field, could easily exercise the most tyrannical and irresponsible
power imaginable. Exclusivecontrol of an essential commodity or
service (as, for example, air transport) is in effect one of the most
far-reaching powers which can be conferred on any authority.
And as there is scarcely anything which could not be justified by
"technical necessities" which no outsider could effectively
question-or even by humanitarian and possibly entirely sincere
arguments about the needs of some specially ill-favoured group
which could not be helped in any other way-there is little possi­
bility of controlling that power. The kind of organisation of the
resources of the world under more or less autonomous bodies,
which now so often finds favour in the most surprising quarters, a
system of comprehensive monopolies recognised by all of the
national governments, but subject to none, would inevitably
become the worst of all conceivable rackets-even if those
entrusted with their administration should prove the most faithful
guardians of the particular interests placed in their care.
One need only seriously consider the full implications of such
apparently innocuous proposals, widely regarded as the essential
basis of the future economic order, such as the conscious control
and distribution of the supply of essential raw materials, in order
to see what appalling political difficulties and moral dangers
they create. The controller of the supply of any such raw material
as petrol or timber, rubber or tin, would be the master of the fate
of whole industries and countries. In deciding whether to allow
the supply to increase and the price or the income of the pro­
ducers to fall, he would decide whether some country is to be
allowed to start some new industry or whether it is to be pre­
cluded from doing so. While he "protects" the standards of life
of those he regards as specially entrusted to his care, he will
deprive many who are in a much worse position of their best
and perhaps only chance to improve it. If all essential raw
materials were thus controlled there would indeed be no new
industry, no new venture on which the people of a country236 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
could embark without the permission of the controllers, no plan
for development or improvement which could not be frustrated
by their veto. The same is true of international arrangement
for "sharing" of markets and even more so of the control of
investment and the development of natural resources.
It is curious to observe how those who pose as the most
hardboiled realists, and who lose no opportunity of casting ridi­
cule on the "utopianism" of those who believe in the possibility
of an international political order, yet regard as more practicable
the much more intimate and irresponsible interference with the
lives of the different peoples which economic planning involves;
and believe that, once hitherto undreamed-of power is given to
an international government, which has just been represented as
not even capable of enforcing a simple Rule of Law, this greater
power will be used in so unselfish and so obviously just a man­
ner as to command general consent. If anything is evident it
should be that, while nations might abide by formal rules on
which they have agreed, they will never submit to the direction
which international economic planning involves-that while
they may agree on the rules of the game, they will never agree on
the order of preference in which the rank of their own needs and
the rate at which they are allowed to advance is fixed by majority
vote. Even if, at first, the peoples should, under some illusion
about the meaning of such proposals, agree to transfer such
powers to an international authority, they would soon find out
that what they have delegated is not merely a technical task, but
the most comprehensive power over their very lives.
What is evidently at the back of the minds of the not
altogether unpracticable "realists" who advocate these schemes
is that, while the great Powers will be unwilling to submit to any
superior authority, they will be able to use those "international"
authorities to impose their will on the smaller nations within the
area in which they exercise hegemony. There is so much "real­
ism" in this that by thus camouflaging the planning authoritiesTHE PROSPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ORDER 237
as "international" it might be easier to achieve the condition
under which international planning is alone practicable, namely,
that it is in effect done by one single predominant power. This
disguise would, however, not alter the fact that for all the smaller
states it would mean a much more complete subjection to an
external power, to which no real resistance would any longer be
possible, than would be involved in the renunciation of a clearly
defined part of political sovereignty.
It is significant that the most passionate advocates of a centrally
directed economic New Order for Europe should display, like
their Fabian and German prototypes, the most complete dis­
regard of the individuality and of the rights of small nations. The
views of Professor Carr, who in this sphere even more than in that
of internal policy is representative of the trend towards totali­
tarianism in this country, have already made one of his profes­
sional colleagues ask the very pertinent question: "If the Nazi
way with small sovereign states is indeed to become the common
form, what is the war about?"! Those who have observed how
much disquiet and alarm some recent utterances on these ques­
tions in papers as different as The Times and the New Statesman2 have
caused among our smaller Allies will have little doubt how much
this attitude is even now resented among our closest friends, and
how easy it will be to dissipate the stock of goodwill which has
been laid up during the war if these advisers are followed.
* * * * *
Those who are so ready to ride roughshod over the rights of
small states are, of course, right in one thing: we cannot hope for
I Professor C. A. W Manning, in a review of Professor Carr's Conditionsof Peace in
the International Affairs Review Supplement, June 1942.
2 It is significant in more than one respect that, as was recently observed in one
of the weekly journals, "one had already begun to expect a touch of the Carr
flavour in the New Statesmanpages as well as in those of The Times" ("Four Winds"
in Time and Tide, February 20, 1943).238 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
order or lasting peace after this war if states, large or small,
regain unfettered sovereignty in the economic sphere. But this
does not mean that a new super-state must be given powers
which we have not learnt to use intelligently even on a national
scale, that an international authority ought to be given power to
direct individual nations how to use their resources. It means
merely that there must be a power which can restrain the dif­
ferent nations from action harmful to their neighbours, a set
of rules which defines what a state may do, and an authority
capable of enforcing these rules. The powers which such an
authority would need are mainly of a negative kind: it must
above all be able to say "no" to all sorts of restrictive measures.
Far from its being true that, as is now widely believed, we
need an international economic authority while the states can at
the same time retain their unrestricted political sovereignty,
almost exactly the opposite is true. What we need and can hope
to achieve is not more power in the hands of irresponsible inter­
national economic authorities, but, on the contrary, a superior
political power which can hold the economic interests in check,
and in the conflict between them can truly hold the scales,
because it is itself not mixed up in the economic game. The need
is for an international political authority which, without power
to direct the different people what they must do, must be able to
restrain them from action which will damage others. The powers
which must devolve on an international authority are not the
new powers assumed by the states in recent times, but that
minimum of powers without which it is impossible to preserve
peaceful relationships, Le. essentially the powers of the ultra­
liberal "laissez-faire"state. And even more than in the national
sphere, it is essential that these powers of the international
authority should be strictly circumscribed by the Rule of Law.
The need for such a super-national authority becomes indeed
greater as the individual states more and more become units of
economic administration, the actors rather than merely theTHE PROSPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ORDER 239
supervisors of the economic scene, and as therefore any friction
is likely to arise not between individuals but between states as
such.
The form of international government under which certain
strictly defined powers are transferred to an international author­
ity, while in all other respects the individual countries remain
responsible for their internal affairs, is, of course, that of feder­
ation. We must not allow the numerous ill-considered and often
extremely silly claims made on behalf of a federal organisation
of the whole world during the height of the propaganda for
"Federal Union" to obscure the fact that the principle of feder­
ation is the only form of association of different peoples which
will create an international order without putting an undue
strain on their legitimate desire for independence. 1 Federalism
is, of course, nothing but the application to international affairs
of democracy, the only method of peaceful change man has yet
invented. But it is a democracy with definitely limited powers.
Apart from the more impracticable ideal of fusing different
countries into a single centralised state (the desirability of which
is far from obvious) it is the only way in which the ideal of
international law can be made a reality. We must not deceive
ourselves that in calling in the past the rules of international
behaviour international law we were doing more than express­
ing a pious wish. When we want to prevent people from killing
each other we are not content to issue a declaration that killing is
undesirable, but we give an authority power to prevent it. In the
same way there can be no international law without a power to
enforce it. The obstacle to the creation of such an international
1 It is a great pity that the flood of federalist publications which in recent years
has descended upon us has deprived the few important and thoughtful works
among them of the attention they deserved. One which in particular ought to
be carefully consulted when the time comes for the framing of a new political
structure of Europe is Dr. W Ivor Jennings's small book on A Federationfor Western
Europe (1940).240 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
power was very largely the idea that it need command all the
practically unlimited powers which the modern state possesses.
But with the division of power under the federal system this is
by no means necessary.
This division of power would inevitably act at the same time
also as a limitation of the power of the whole as well as of the
individual state. Indeed many of the kinds of planning which are
now fashionable would probably become altogether impos­
sible.1 But it would by no means constitute an obstacle to all
planning. It is, in fact, one of the main advantages of federation
that it can be so devised as to make most of the harmful planning
difficult while leaving the way free for all desirable planning. It
prevents, or can be made to prevent, most forms of restriction­
ism. And it confines international planning to the fields where
true agreement can be reached-not only between the "inter­
ests" immediately concerned, but among all those affected. The
desirable forms of planning which can be effected locally and
without the need of restrictive measures, are left free and in the
hands of those best qualified to undertake it. It is even to be
hoped that within a federation, where there will no longer exist
the same reasons for making the individual states as strong as
possible, the process of centralisation of the past may in some
measure be reversed and some devolution of powers from the
state to the local authorities become possible.
It is worth recalling that the idea of the world at last finding
peace through the absorption of the separate states in large fed­
erated groups and ultimately perhaps in one single federation,
far from being new, was indeed the ideal of almost all the liberal
thinkers of the nineteenth century. From Tennyson, whose much
quoted vision of the "battle of the air" is followed by a vision of
the federation of the people which will follow their last great
1 See on this the author's article on "Economic Conditions of Inter-State
Federation", The New CommonwealthQuarterly,vol. V, September 1939.THE PROSPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ORDER 241
fight, right down to the end of the century the final achievement
of a federal organisation remained the ever-recurring hope of a
next great step in the advance of civilisation. Nineteenth-century
liberals may not have been fully aware how essential a comple­
ment of their principles a federal organisation of the different
states formed 1; but there were few among them who did
not express their belief in it as an ultimate goal.2 It was only
with the approach of our twentieth century that before the
triumphant rise of Realpolitikthese hopes came to be regarded as
unpracticable and utopian.
* * * * *
We shall not rebuild civilisation on the large scale. It is no acci­
dent that on the whole there was more beauty and decency to be
found in the life of the small peoples, and that among the large
ones there was more happiness and content in proportion as
they had avoided the deadly blight of centralisation. Least of all
shall we preserve democracy or foster its growth if all the power
and most of the important decisions rest with an organisation
far too big for the common man to surveyor comprehend.
Nowhere has democracy ever worked well without a great
measure of local self-government, providing a school of political
training for the people at large as much as for their future
leaders. It is only where responsibility can be learnt and prac­
tised in affairs with which most people are familiar, where it is
the awareness of one's neighbour rather than some theoretical
knowledge of the needs of other people which guides action,
1 See on this Professor Robbins's already quoted book, pp. 240-57.
2 As late as the closing years of the nineteenth century Henry Sidgwick
thought it "not beyond the limits of a sober forecast to conjecture that some
future integration may take place in the West European states: and if it should
take place, it seems probable that the example of America will be followed, and
that the new political aggregate will be formed on the basis of a federal polity"
(The Developmentof European Polity, published posthumously in 1903, p. 439).242 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
that the ordinary man can take a real part in public affairs
because they concern the world he knows. Where the scope of
the political measures becomes so large that the necessary know­
ledge is almost exclusively possessed by the bureaucracy, the
creative impulses of the private person must flag. I believe that
here the experience of the small countries like Holland and
Switzerland contains much from which even the most fortunate
larger countries like Great Britain can learn. We shall all be the
gainers if we can create a world fit for small states to live in.
But the small can preserve their independence in the inter­
national as in the national sphere only within a true system of
law which guarantees both that certain rules are invariably
enforced and that the authority which has the power to enforce
these cannot use it for any other purpose. While for its task of
enforcing the common law the super-national authority must be
very powerful, its constitution must at the same time be so
designed that it prevents the international as well as the national
authorities from becoming tyrannical. We shall never prevent
the abuse of power if we are not prepared to limit power in a
way which occasionally may also prevent its use for desirable
purposes. The great opportunity we shall have at the end of this
war is that the great victorious powers, by themselves first sub­
mitting to a system of rules which they have the power to
enforce, may at the same time acquire the moral right to impose
the same rules upon others.
An international authority which effectively limits the powers
of the state over the individual will be one of the best safeguards
of peace. The international Rule of Law must become a safeguard
as much against the tyranny of the state over the individual as
against the tyranny of the new super-state over the national
communities. Neither an omnipotent super-state, nor a loose
association of "free nations" , but a community of nations of free
men must be our goal. We have long pleaded that it had become
impossible to behave in international affairs as we thought itTHE PROSPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ORDER 243
desirable because others would not play the game. The coming
settlement will be the opportunity to show that we have been
sincere and that we are prepared to accept the same restrictions
on our freedom of action which in the common interest we
think it necessary to impose upon others.
Wisely used, the federal principle of organisation may indeed
prove the best solution of some of the world's most difficult
problems. But its application is a task of extreme difficulty and
we are not likely to succeed if in an over-ambitious attempt we
strain it beyond its capacity. There will probably exist a strong
tendency to make any new international organisation all­
comprehensive and world-wide; and there will, of course, be an
imperative need for some such comprehensive organisation,
some new League of Nations. The great danger is that, if in the
attempt to rely exclusively on this world organisation it is
charged with all the tasks which it seems desirable to place in the
hands of an international organisation, they will not in fact be
adequately performed. It has always been my conviction that
such ambitions were at the root of the weakness of the League of
Nations: that in the (unsuccessful) attempt to make it world­
wide it had to be made weak, and that a smaller and at the same
time more powerful League might have been a better instrument
to preserve peace. I believe that these considerations still hold
and that a degree of co-operation could be achieved between,
say, the British Empire and the nations of Western Europe and
probably the United States which would not be possible on a
world scale. The comparatively close association which a Federal
Union represents will not at first be practicable beyond perhaps
even as narrow a region as part of Western Europe, though it
may be possible gradually to extend it.
It is true that with the formation of such regional federations
the possibility of war between the different blocs still remains,
and that to reduce this risk as much as possible we must rely on a
larger and looser association. My point is that the need for some244 THE ROAD TO SERFDOM
such other organisation should not form an obstacle to a closer
association of those countries which are more similar in their
civilisation, outlook, and standards. While we must aim at pre­
venting future wars as much as possible, we must not believe
that we can at one stroke create a permanent organisation which
will make all war in any part of the world entirely impossible.
We should not only not succeed in such an attempt, but we
should thereby probably spoil our chances of achieving success
in a more limited sphere. As is true with respect to other great
evils, the measures by which war might be made altogether
impossible for the future may well be worse than even war itself
If we can reduce the risk of friction likely to lead to war, this is
probably all we can reasonably hope to achieve.CONCLUSION
The purpose of this book has not been to sketch a detailed
programme of a desirable future order of society. If with regard
to international affairs we have gone a little beyond its essentially
critical task, it was because in this field we may soon be called
upon to create a framework within which future growth may
have to proceed for a long time to come. A great deal will
depend on how we use the opportunity we shall then have. But
whatever we do, it can only be the beginning of a new, long, and
arduous process in which we all hope we shall gradually create a
world very different from that which we knew during the last
quarter of a century. It is at least doubtful whether at this stage a
detailed blueprint of a desirable internal order of society would
be of much use-or whether anyone is competent to furnish it.
The important thing now is that we shall come to agree on
certain principles and free ourselves from some of the errors
which have governed us in the recent past. However distasteful
such an admission may be, we must recognise that we had
before this war once again reached a stage where it is more246 CONCLUSION
important to clear away the obstacles with which human folly
has encumbered our path and to release the creative energy of
individuals than to devise further machinery for "guiding" and
"directing" them-to create conditions favourable to progress
rather than to "plan progress". The first need is to free ourselves
of that worst form of contemporary obscurantism which tries to
persuade us that what we have done in the recent past was all
either wise or inevitable. We shall not grow wiser before we
learn that much that we have done was very foolish.
If we are to build a better world we must have the courage to
make a new start-even if that means some reculerpour mieuxsauter.
It is not those who believe in inevitable tendencies who show this
courage, not those who preach a "New Order" which is no more
than a projection of the tendencies of the last forty years, and
who can think of nothing better than to imitate Hitler. It is
indeed those who cry loudest for the New Order who are most
completely under the sway of the ideas which have created this
war and most of the evils from which we suffer. The young are
right if they have little confidence in the ideas which rule most of
their elders. But they are mistaken or misled when they believe
that these are still the liberal ideas of the nineteenth century,
which in fact the younger generation hardly knows. Though we
neither can wish, nor possess the power, to go back to the reality
of the nineteenth century, we have the opportunity to realise its
ideals-and they were not mean. We have little right to feel in
this respect superior to our grandfathers; and we should never
forget that it is we, the twentieth century, and not they, who have
made a mess of things. If they had not yet fully learnt what was
necessary to create the world they wanted, the experience we
have since gained ought to have equipped us better for the task. If
in the first attempt to create a world of free men we have failed,
we must try again. The guiding principle, that a policy of free­
dom for the individual is the only truly progressive policy,
remains as true to-day as it was in the nineteenth century.BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
The exposition of a point of view which for many years has been decidedly
out of favour suffers from the difficultythat, within the compass of a few
chapters, it is not possible to discuss more than some aspects of it. For the
reader whose outlook has been formed entirely by the views that have been
dominant during the last twenty years this will scarcely be sufficient to
provide the common ground required for profitable discussion. But
although unfashionable, the views of the author of the present book are
not so singular as they may appear to some readers. His basic outlook is
the same as that of a steadily growing number of writers in many countries
whose studies have led them independently to similar conclusions. The
reader who would like to acquaint himself further with what he may have
found an unfamiliar but not uncongenial climate of opinion, may find
useful the following list of some of the more important works of this kind,
including several in which the essentially critical character of the present
essay is supplemented by a fuller discussion of the structure of a desirable
future society.
W. H. Chamberlin. A False Utopia. Collectivism in Theory and Practice.
(Duckworth) , 937.
F. D. Graham. SocialGoals and EconomicInstitutions.(Princeton University
Press) , 942.248 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
E. Halevy. L'Ere des Tyrannies. Paris (Gallimard) 1938. English versions of
two of the most important essays in this volume will be found in
Economica,February1941, and in InternationalAffairs,1934·
G. Halm, L. v. Mises, and others. CollectivistEconomicPlanning,ed. by F. A.
Hayek. (Routledge) 1937.
W. H. Hutt. Economistsand the Public. (Cape) 1935·
W. Lippmann, An Inquiry into the Principles of the Good Society. (Allen G{
Unwin) 1937.
L. v. Mises. Socialism,trsl. by J. Kahane. (Cape) 1936.
R. Muir. Libertyand Civilisation.(Cape) 1940.
M. Polanyi. The Contempt of Freedom. (Watts) 1940.
W. Rappard. The Crisis of Democracy. (Universityof Chicago Press) 1938.
L. C. Robbins. Economic Planning and International Order. (Macmillan)
1937·
L. C. Robbins. The Economic Basis of Class Conflict and Other Essays in
PoliticalEconomy. (Macmillan) 1939.
L. C. Robbins. The EconomicCauses ofWar. (Cape) 1939.
W. Roepke. Die Gesellschaftskrisisder Gegenwart. Zurich (Eugen Rentsch)
1942 .
L. Rougier. Les mystiqueseconomiques.Paris (LibrairieMedicis) 1938.
F. A. Voigt. Unto Caesar. (Constable) 1938.
The following of the "Public Policy Pamphlets" edited by the University of
Chicago Press-
H. Simons. A Positive Programfor Laissez-Faire.Some Proposalsfara Liberal
EconomicPolicy. 1934.
H. D. Gideonse. OrganisedScarcityand Public Policy. 1939.
F. A. Hermens. Democracyand ProportionalRepresentation.1940.
W. Sulzbach. "CapitalistWarmongers":A Modern Superstition.1942.
M. A. Heilperin. EconomicPolicyand Democracy.1943.
There are also important German and Italian works of a similar
character which, in consideration for their authors, it would be unwise at
present to mention by name.
To this list I add the titles of three books which more than any others
known to me help one to understand the system of ideas ruling our
enemies and the differences which separate their minds from ours,
E. B. Ashton. The Fascist, His State and Mind. (Putnam) 1937.
F. W. Foerster. Europe and the German Question. (Sheed) 1940.
H. Kantorowicz. The Spiritof English Policyand the Myth ofthe Encirclement
of Germany. (Allen & Unwin) 1931.BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 249
and that of a remarkable recent work on the modem history of Germany
which is not as well known in this country as it deserves:
F. Schnabel. DeutscheGeschichteim '9. Jahrhundert.4 vols. Freiburg, i. B.
'92 9-37.
Perhaps the best guides through some ofour contemporary problems will
still be found in the works of some of the great political philosophers of the
liberal age, a de Tocquevilleor Lord Acton, and, to go even farther back,
Benjamin Constant, Edmund Burke, and the Federalist papers of Madison,
Hamilton, and Jay, generations to whom liberty was still a problem and a
value to be defended, where ours at the same time takes it for granted and
neither realises whence the danger threatens nor has the courage to
emancipate itself from the doctrines which endanger it.