#1 BESTSELLER
TWO MILLION COPIES SOLD
Why Some Companies
Make the Leap...
and Others Don't
GOOD TO
I
SAVEDUPTO 80
ONTHISTEXTBOO
Powered by
ookRenter.
A
COLLINS
>r of the bestsellinq
r TO LASTUSA $27.50
CANADA $34.75
THE CHALLENGE
Built to Last, the defining management study of the
nineties, showed how great companies triumph over
time and how long-term sustained performance can be
engineered into the DNA of an enterprise from the very
beginning.
But what about the company that is not born with
great DNA? How can good companies, mediocre compa
nies, even bad companies achieve enduring greatness?
THE STUDY
For years, this guestion preyed on the mind of Jim
Collins. Are there companies that defy gravity and con
vert long-term mediocrity or worse into long-term
superiority? And if so, what are the universal distin
guishing characteristics that cause a company to go
from good to great?
THE STANDARDS
Using tough benchmarks, Collins and his research team
identified a set of elite companies that made the leap
to great results and sustained those results for at least
fifteen years. How great? After the leap, the good-to-
great companies generated cumulative stock returns
that beat the general stock market by an average of
seven times in fifteen years, better than twice the
results delivered by a composite index of the world's
greatest companies, including Coca-Cola, Intel, General
Electric, and Merck.
THE COMPARISONS
The research team contrasted the good-to-great
companies with a carefully selected set of comparison
companies that failed to make the leap from good to
great. What was different? Why did one set of compa
nies become truly great performers while the other set
remained only good?
Over five years, the team analyzed the histories of
all twenty-eight companies in the study. After sifting
through mountains of data and thousands of pages of
interviews, Collins and his crew discovered the key
determinants of greatness—why some companies make
the leap and others don't.
(continued on back flap) 1001GOOD TO GREATA L SO BY JIM CO L L IN S
Built to hast
(with Jerry I. Porras)m mi ;n* #* &••
, ,' „K
>M?,
Iff ;i*k1
&'*" si: -A
viV' *"
G ^M^y *
1$$
Why Some Companies
Make the Leap . . .
and Others Don't
C Collins
An Imprintof HarperCollinsPubl/shersgood to great. Copyright© 2001 by JimCollins.All rights reserved.
Printedin the UnitedStates of America.No part of this book
maybe usedor reproducedin anymannerwhatsoeverwithout written
permissionexceptin the case of briefquotationsembodied in
critical articles and reviews. For information address
HarperCollinsPublishersInc., 10East 53rd Street,New York,NY 10022.
HarperCollinsbooksmay be purchasedfor educational,business,or sales
promotionaluse.For informationpleasewrite:
SpecialMarketsDepartment,HarperCollinsPublishersInc.,
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022.
Designedby Jo AnneMetsch
Libraryof CongressCataloging-in-PublicationData
Collins, JamesC. (JamesCharles), 1958-
Good togreat:why somecompaniesmakethe leap ... and others
don't / Jim Collins.— 1sted.
p. cm.
Includesbibliographicalreferencesand index.
ISBN 0-06-662099-6(he)
1. Leadership. 2. Strategicplanning. 3. Organizational
change. 4. Technologicalinnovations—Management. I. Title
HD57.7.C645 2001
658-dc21 2001024818
07 08 09 RRD 90 89 88 87 86This book is dedicatedto theChimps
I love you all, each andevery one.CONTENTS
Acknowledgments ix
Preface xiii
1: Good Is the Enemy of Great 1
2: Level 5 Leadership 17
3: First Who ... Then What 41
4: Confront the Brutal Facts
(Yet Never Lose Faith) 65
5: The Hedgehog Concept
(Simplicitywithinthe ThreeCircles) 90
6: ACulture of Discipline 120
7: TechnologyAccelerators J44
8: The Flywheeland the DoomLoop 164
9: From Good to Great to Built to Last J 8 8
epilogue: FrequentlyAsked Questions 211
ResearchAppendices 219
Notes 261
Index 287MEMBERS OF THE G O O D-TO - G R E AT RESEARCH TEAM
ASSEMBLED FOR TEAM MEETING, JANUARY 2000
Firstrow: Vicki MosurOsgood,Alyson Sinclair,StefanieA.
Judd, Christine Jones
Secondrow: Eric Hagen,Duane C. Duffy,PaulWeissman,
Scott Jones, Weijia (Eve) Li
Thirdrow: NicholasM. Osgood,Jenni Cooper,Leigh
Wilbanks,AnthonyJ. Chirikos
Fourth row: BrianJ. Bagley,Jim Collins,Brian C. Larsen,
PeterVan Genderen, Lane Hornung
Notpictured:ScottCederberg,MortenT. Hansen,AmberL.
Young
Photo credit:Jim Collins Collection.ACKUQ\NL£BQM&MTS
ft o say this book is "by Jim Collins"overstatesthe case. Withoutthe
significantcontributions made by other people, this book would certainly
not exist.
At the top of the list are members of the research team. I was truly
blessedto have an extraordinarygroup of people dedicated to the project.
In aggregate,they contributed something on the order of15,000hours of
workto the project, and the standardtheyset forthemselvesin the quality
of their work set a high standardfor me to tryto live up to.As I struggled
with writing the book, I pictured all the hardworkingmembers of the
team who dedicated months (in some cases, years) to this effort looking
overmy shoulder and holding meaccountable,challengingme to create
a final manuscript that met theirstandards,worthyof their toil and contri
bution. I hope this effort meets with theirapproval.Any failure to reach
that standard rests entirely with me.
Members of the Research Team for
Good to Great
Brian J. Bagley
ScottCederberg
AnthonyJ. Chirikos
Jenni Cooper
Duane C. Duffy
EricHagen
Morten T. Hansen
LaneHornung
ChristineJones
Scott Jones
StefanieA. Judd
Brian C. Larsen
Weijia (Eve) Li
NicholasM. Osgood
Vicki MosurOsgood
Alyson Sinclair
Peter Van Genderen
Paul Weissman
Leigh Wilbanks
AmberL. Young
In addition, I would like to thank Denis B. Nock at the Universityof
Colorado Graduate School ofBusiness,who was instrumental in helping
me identifyand recruit the very bestgraduatestudentsto join the researchx Acknowledgments
team. Gettingthe rightresearchteammemberson the buswas the single
mostimportantstep in makingthe projectsuccessful,and Denis playeda
singularlyimportantrole in gettinga wholebusloadofgreatpeople.Also at
the Universityof Colorado, I am indebted to CarolKrismannand her ded
icated staff at the William M. White Business Library, who patiently
worked with members of the research team to locate all sorts of arcane
information. In addition to Carol, I would like to acknowledge Betty
Grebe, LynnetteLeiker,Dinah McKay,MarthaJo Sani,and JeanWhelan.
I am particularlyindebted to a large number of critical readers who
investedhoursin readingdraftsofthe manuscriptandfeedingme the bru
talfacts aboutwhat neededto beimproved.Yet despitesometimessearing
(andalwayshelpful)feedback,theycontinuallyreinforcedmyfaith in the
potential of the project. For their franknessand insight, I would like to
thank Kirk Arnold, R. Wayne Boss, Natalia Cherney-Roca, Paul M.
Cohen, Nicole Toomey Davis, Andrew Fenniman, Christopher For-
man, William C. Garriock,Terry Gold, Ed Greenberg, Martha Green-
berg,Wayne H. Gross,GeorgeH. Hagen,BeckyHall,LizHeron,John G.
Hill, Ann H. Judd,Rob Kaufman,Joe Kennedy, Keith Kennedy, Butch
Kerzner, Alan Khazei, Anne Knapp, Betina Koski, Ken Krechmer, Bar
bara B.Lawton,Ph.D., Kyle Lefkoff,Kevin Maney,BillMiller, Joseph P.
Modica, Thomas W. Morris,Robert Mrlik,John T. Myser, Peter Nosier,
Antonia Ozeroff,Jerry Peterson,Jim Reid, James J. Robb, John Rogers,
Kevin Rumon, Heather Reynolds Sagar, Victor Sanvido, Mason D.
Schumacher, JeffreyL. Seglin, Sina Simantob, Orin Smith, Peter Staud-
hammer, Rick Sterling, Ted Stolberg, Jeff Tarr, Jean Taylor, Kim
HollingsworthTaylor,Tom Tierney,John Vitale,Dan Wardrop,Mark H.
Willes,DavidL. Witherow,and AnthonyR.Yue.
We were very fortunate to have the participation of executivesinstru
mental in the transformation at the good-to-great companies who
patiently endured our questions during one- to two-hour interviewsand,
at times, follow-up conversations.To each of the following people, I
would express my hopes that this book captures the best of what you
accomplished.Truly, you are the unsung heroes of American business:
Robert Aders, William F. Aldinger, III, Richard J. Appert, Charles J.
Aschauer,Jr., Dick Auchter, H. DavidAycock,James D. Bernd, Douglas
M. Bibby, Roger E. Birk, Marc C. Breslawsky,Eli Broad, Dr. Charles S.
Brown, Walter Bruckart,Vernon A. Brunner, James E. Campbell, Fred
Canning, Joseph J. Cisco, Richard Cooley, Michael J. Critelli, Joseph F.
Cullman 3rd, John A. Doherty,DouglasD. Drysdale,Lyle Everingham,Acknowledgments xi
Meredith B. Fischer, Paul N. Fruitt, Andreas Gembler, Milton L. Glass,
James G. Grosklaus, Jack Grundhofer, George B. Harvey, James Her
ring, James D. Hlavacek, Gene D. Hoffman, J. Timothy Howard,
Charles D. Hunter, F. Kenneth Iverson, James A. Johnson, L. Daniel
Jorndt, Robert L. Joss, Arthur Juergens, William E. Kelvie, Linda K.
Knight, Glenn S. Kraiss, Robert J. Levin, Edmund Wattis Littlefield,
David O. Maxwell, Hamish Maxwell, Ellen Merlo, Hyman Meyers,
Arjay Miller, John N. D. Moody, David Nassef,Frank Newman, Arthur
C. Nielsen, Jr., John D. Ong, Dr. Emanuel M. Papper, Richard D. Par
sons, Derwyn Phillips,MarvinA. Pohlman,William D. Pratt, Fred Pur
due, Michael J. Quigley,George Rathmann,Carl E. Reichardt,Daniel
M. Rexinger,BillRivas, Dennis Roney, FrancisC. Rooney,Jr.,Wayne R.
Sanders, Robert A. Schoellhorn, Bernard H. Semler, Samuel Siegel,
Thomas F. Skelly,Joseph P. Stiglich,Joseph F. Turley, Glenn S. Utt Jr.,
Edward Villanueva,Charles R. Walgreen,Jr., Charles R. Walgreen,III,
WilliamH. Webb, GeorgeWeissman,BlairWhite,William Wilson,Alan
L. Wurtzel, and William E. Zierden.
Numerous people from the companies in our research were enor
mouslyhelpfulwith arranginginterviewsand providingus keydocuments
and information.In particular,I would liketo note Catherine Babington,
DavidA. Baldwin,Ann Fahey-Widman,and MiriamWeltyTrangsrudat
AbbottLaboratories;Ann M. Collier at Circuit City;John P. DiQuollo at
Fannie Mae; David A. Fausch and Danielle M. Frizzi at Gillette; Tina
Barryfor her assistanceat Kimberly-Clarkand her insightsabout Darwin
Smith; Lisa Crouch and Angie McCoyat Kimberly-Clark;JackCornett at
Kroger;Terry S. Lisenbyand CorneliaWells at Nucor; StevenC. Parrish
and Timothy A. Sompolskiat Philip Morris; SherylY. Battlesand Diana
L. Russo at Pitney Bowes,Thomas L. Mammoserand Laurie L. Meyer at
Walgreens;and Naomi S.Ishidaat Wells Fargo.
I would like to give specialthanks to Diane Compagno Miller for her
help in opening doors at Wells Fargo,John S. Reed for his help in open
ing doors at Philip Morris, Sharon L. Wurtzel for her help in opening
doors at Circuit City, Carl M. Brauerfor his insightson Circuit City and
generoussharingofhis manuscript, JamesG. Clawsonfor his Circuit City
cases and insights,Karen Lewis for her assistancewith Hewlett-Packard
Company Archives,Tracy Russell and her colleaguesat The Center for
Researchin SecurityPricesfortheir diligencein ensuringthat wehad the
most current data available,Virginia A. Smith for her helpful guidance,
Nick Sagarforkeybeta, MarvinBresslerforhis insightand wisdom,Brucexii Acknowledgments
Woolpertfor helpingme tounderstandthe conceptofmechanisms(and
for his ongoingsupport),Ruth Ann Bagleyfor herdiligentproofreading,
Dr. JeffreyT. Luftigforaccessto hisremarkablebrain, ProfessorWilliam
Briggs for his abilityto break a complexproblem into useful simplicity,
AdmiralJim Stockdalefor his invaluableteaching,JenniferFuternickfor
her inspirationin creatingthe McKinseysalon that ignited this project,
and Bill Meehan forthe initialspark.
I wouldlike to make specialnote ofJerryPorrasas my researchmentor;
James J. Robb as my talentedgraphicsconsultant,Peter Ginsbergas my
trusted agent and fellow council member in the publishingworld; Lisa
Berkowitz,who makes magic happen; and Adrian Zackheim, who has
enthusiasticallybelievedin andsupportedthis bookfrom the momenthe
learned of it.
Finally,I amdeeplythankfulfor my greatgoodfortunetobe marriedto
JoanneErnst.Aftertwentyyears ofmarriage,she continuesto put upwith
my somewhatneurotic nature andpropensityto become consumed with
projectssuchas this one. Notonly isshe my most helpfulcritic,but sheis
also my deepestand most enduringsupport.The ultimatedefinitionof
successin life is thatyour spouselikes and respectsyou ever more as the
years go by. By that measure,more than any other, I hope to be as suc
cessful as she is.PREFACE
j|pii|| s j was finishingthis manuscript,I wentfor a run up a steep,rocky
trail in EldoradoSpringsCanyon, justsouth of my home in Boulder, Col
orado. I had stopped on top at one of myfavoritesittingplaces with aview
of the high countrystill coveredin its wintercoat ofsnow, when an odd
question popped into my mind: How muchwould someone have to pay
me notto publish Good to Great?
It was an interesting thought experiment, given that I'd just spent the
previousfive years workingon the researchproject andwritingthis book.
Not that there isn't some number that might entice me to bury it, but by
the time I crossed the hundred-million-dollar threshold, it was time to
head back down the trail. Even that much couldn't convince me to aban
don the project.I am a teacher at heart.As such, it isimpossiblefor me to
imagine not sharingwhat we've learned withstudentsaround the world.
And it is in the spiritof learningand teachingthat I bring forth thiswork.
After many months of hiding away like a hermit in what I call monk
mode,I wouldvery much enjoyhearingfrom peopleabout whatworksfor
them and what doesnot. I hope youwill find much ofvalue in thesepages
and will commit to applyingwhatyou learn to whateveryou do, if not to
your company,then to your social sectorwork, and if not there, then at
least to your own life.
—Jim Collins
jimcollins@aol.com
www.jimcollins.com
Boulder, Colorado
March 27, 2001GOOD TO GREATC H A P T E R
That's whatmakes death sohard—unsatisfiedcuriosity.
—Beryl Markham,
West with the Night1
^ifi^ood is the enemy ofgreat.
And that is one of the key reasons why we have so little that becomes
great.
We don'thave greatschools,principallybecausewehavegood schools.
We don't have greatgovernment,principallybecause wehave good gov
ernment. Few people attain greatlives, in large part because it is just so
easyto settlefora goodlife.The vast majorityofcompanies never become
great,preciselybecause thevast majoritybecome quitegood—andthat is
their main problem.
This point became piercinglyclear to me in 1996, when I was having
dinner with a group of thought leaders gathered for a discussionabout
organizationalperformance.Bill Meehan, the managing director of the
San Francisco office of McKinsey& Company, leaned over and casually
confided, "You know, Jim, we love Built to Last around here. You and
your coauthor did a very fine job on the researchand writing. Unfortu
nately, it's useless."
Curious, I askedhim to explain.
"The companies youwroteabout were,forthe most part, alwaysgreat,"
he said. "They never had to turn themselvesfrom good companies into
great companies. They had parents like David Packard and George
Merck, who shaped the character of greatnessfrom early on. But what
about the vast majorityof companies that wake up partwaythrough life
and realizethat they're good, but not great?"
I now realize that Meehanwas exaggeratingfor effectwith his"useless"
comment, but hisessentialobservationwas correct—thattrulygreat com-The Good-to-Great Study
o 1.00 = Market Baseline
Transition Point
-15 -10 +5
Shows average ratio, each company set to 1.00 at transition date.
+10
Good-to-Great
Companies
Direct Comparison
Companies
+15 Years from Transition
O
oGood to Great 3
panies, for the most part, havealwaysbeen great.And the vastmajorityof
goodcompaniesremain justthat—good,but not great. Indeed, Meehan's
comment provedto be an invaluablegift, as it planted the seed of a ques
tion that became thebasis of this entirebook—namely,Can a goodcom
pany become a great company and, if so,how? Or is the disease of "just
being good" incurable?
Fiveyearsafterthat fatefuldinner wecan nowsay, withoutquestion,that
good to greatdoes happen,and we've learnedmuch about theunderlying
variablesthat make it happen. Inspired by Bill Meehan's challenge,my
researchteam and I embarkedon a five-yearresearcheffort, a journeyto
explorethe inner workingsofgood to great.
Toquicklygraspthe conceptofthe project,lookat the chartonpage 2.*
In essence,we identifiedcompaniesthat made the leapfrom good results
to greatresultsand sustainedthoseresultsfor at leastfifteenyears.We com
paredthese companiesto acarefullyselectedcontrolgroupofcomparison
companiesthat failed to make the leap, or if they did,failed to sustain it.
We then comparedthe good-to-greatcompaniesto the comparisoncom
paniesto discoverthe essentialand distinguishingfactorsat work.
The good-to-greatexamples that made the final cut into the study
attained extraordinaryresults, averaging cumulative stock returns 6.9
times the general market in the fifteen years following their transition
points.2To put thatinperspective,GeneralElectric(consideredbymany
to be the best-ledcompany in America at the end of the twentieth cen
tury) outperformedthe marketby 2.8times over the fifteenyears 1985 to
2000.3 Furthermore,ifyou invested$1 in a mutual fund ofthe good-to-
great companies in 1965, holding each companyat the general market
rate until the date oftransition,and simultaneouslyinvested$1 in a gen
eral market stock fund, your $1 in the good-to-greatfund taken out on
January1, 2000, would have multiplied471 times,comparedto a 56 fold
increase in the market.4
These are remarkable numbers, made all the more remarkable when
you consider the fact that they camefrom companiesthat had previously
beenso utterlyi/nremarkable.Considerjustone case,Walgreens.Forover
forty years, Walgreens had bumped along as a very average company,
moreor less trackingthe generalmarket.Then in 1975, seeminglyout of
nowhere—bang!—Walgreensbegan to climb . . . and climb . . . and
*A descriptionof how the chartson pages 2 and 4 werecreated appearsin chapter 1
notes at the end of the book.$500
$400
$300
$200
Jim Collins
Cumulative Stock Returns of $1 Invested,
1965-2000
Good-to-Great
Companies: $471
Direct Comparison
$100 r Companies:$93
General Market: $56
1970 1976 1982 1988 1994 2000
Notes:
1. $1 divided evenly across companies in each set, January 1,1965.
2. Each company held at market rate of return, until transition date.
3. Cumulative value of each fund shown as of January 1,2000.
4. Dividends reinvested, adjusted for all stock splits.
climb ... and climb ... and it just kept climbing. From December 31,
1975, to January 1, 2000, $1 invested in Walgreensbeat $1 invested in
technologysuperstarIntel by nearlytwotimes,General Electric by nearly
five times,Coca-Colabynearlyeighttimes,and the generalstockmarket
(including the NASDAQ stock run-up at the end of1999) by overfifteen
times.*
How on earth did a companywith such a long historyof being nothing
special transformitselfinto an enterprisethat outperformed some of the
best-ledorganizationsin the world?And whywas Walgreensable to make
the leap when other companies in the same industrywith the same oppor
tunities and similar resources, such as Eckerd, did not make the leap?
This singlecase capturesthe essenceof our quest.
This book is not aboutWalgreensper se, or any of thespecificcompa-
*Calculations of stock returns used throughout this book reflect the total cumulative
return to an investor, dividends reinvestedand adjusted for stock splits. The "general
stock market" (often referred to as simply "the market") reflects the totality of stocks
tradedon the NewYork Exchange,AmericanStockExchange,and NASDAQ.See the
notes to chapter 1 for detailson data sourcesandcalculations.Good to Great 5
nieswe studied.It isabout the question—Cana good companybecome a
great company and, if so, how?—and our search for timeless, universal
answersthat can beappliedbyany organization.
'r^^^ dftliemsiirpriS'-
:ypg andI quite c$ntfrarytacfflventionalwisdom,but one giantconclu-
>;;siQp'st€indsabove,the*otheri:We believethatalmosta/Tyjorgaoization
. can ^uDstential^jrnprpveltsstatureand pe%rmancerRerha|Ds;gven
; ^GSrrjergr^at,.ifit c©ri|pientious|yapplies |he%iram4wprkof ideas
;Vwe^euncay^d/, •.] ^ / \ V% [' t't"»>:> fJ/( "
This book isdedicatedto teachingwhat weVe learned.The remainder
of this introductorychapter tells the story of our journey, outlines our
researchmethod,and previewsthe key findings.In chapter2, we launch
headlonginto the findings themselves,beginningwith one of themost
provocativeofthe wholestudy: Level 5leadership.
UNDAUNTED CURIOSITY
People often ask, "What motivatesyou to undertakethese huge research
projects?"It's agood question.The answer is, "Curiosity."There is noth
ing I find more excitingthan picking a question that I don't know the
answer to and embarkingon aquest for answers. It's deeplysatisfyingto
climb into the boat, like Lewis and Clark, and head west, saying, "We
don'tknow whatwellfind when we get there,butwe'll besure tolet you
know when weget back."
Here is the abbreviatedstoryofthis particularodysseyofcuriosity.
Phase 1: The Search
With the question in hand, I began to assemble a team of researchers.
(When I use "we" throughoutthis book, I am referringto the research
team. In all, twenty-onepeopleworked on theprojectat key points,usu
allyin teams of four tosix at a time.)
Our first task was to find companiesthatshowedthe good-to-greatpat
tern exemplifiedin the chart onpage 2.Welaunched a six-month"death
march offinancialanalysis,"lookingfor companiesthat showed the fol-6 Jim Collins
lowingbasic pattern:fifteen-yearcumulativestockreturns at or below the
general stock market, punctuated by atransitionpoint, then cumulative
returns at least three times the market over the next fifteen years. We
picked fifteen years because it would transcend one-hit wonders and
lucky breaks (you can't justbe luckyfor fifteenyears) and would exceed
the averagetenure ofmostchief executiveofficers(helpingus toseparate
great companies from companiesthat just happened to have a single
great leader). We picked three times the market because it exceeds the
performance of most widely acknowledgedgreat companies. For per
spective,a mutual fund ofthe following"marquisset"of companiesbeat
the market by only 2.5 times over the years 1985 to 2000: 3M, Boeing,
Coca-Cola, GE, Hewlett-Packard, Intel, Johnson & Johnson, Merck,
Motorola,Pepsi, Procter & Gamble,Wal-Mart,and Walt Disney. Not a
bad set to beat.
From an initialuniverseofcompaniesthat appearedon the Fortune 500
in theyears 1965 to 1995,we systematicallysearchedand sifted,eventually
finding eleven good-to-greatexamples.(I've put a detaileddescriptionof
our search in Appendix LA.) However, a couple of points deserve brief
mention here.First,a companyhad to demonstratethe good-to-greatpat
tern independentofits industry;ifthe whole industryshowedthe samepat
tern, we dropped the company. Second, we debated whether we should
use additionalselectioncriteriabeyondcumulativestock returns,such as
impacton societyand employeewelfare.We eventuallydecided to limit
our selectionto thegood-to-greatresultspattern,as we could notconceive
of anylegitimateand consistentmethodforselectingon these othervari
ables withoutintroducingour own biases. In the lastchapter,however,I
addressthe relationshipbetweencorporatevaluesand enduringgreatcom
panies,but thefocus ofthis particularresearcheffortison the veryspecific
questionof how to turn a good organizationinto one that producessus
tained great results.
Atfirst glance,wewere surprisedbythe list. Who would have thought
that Fannie Maewould beat companieslike GE andCoca-Cola?Or that
Walgreenscould beatIntel?The surprisinglist—a dowdiergroup would
be hardto find—taughtusa key lessonrightup front. It ispossibleto turn
good intogreatin themost unlikelyofsituations.Thisbecamethe first of
many surprises that led us to reevaluate our thinking about corporate
greatness.Good to Great
GOOD-TO-GREAT CASES
Results from Transition
Point to 15 Years beyond T Year to
Company Transition Point* T Year + 15
Abbott 3.98 times the market 1974-1989
Circuit City 18.50 times the market 1982-1997
Fannie Mae 7.56 times the market 1984-1999
Gillette 7.39 times the market 1980-1995
Kimberly-Clark 3.42 times the market 1972-1987
Kroger 4.17 times the market 1973-1988
Nucor 5.16 times the market 1975-1990
Philip Morris 7.06 times the market 1964-1979
Pitney Bowes 7.16 times the market 1973-1988
Walgreens 7.34 times the market 1975-1990
Wells Fargo 3.99 times the market 1983-1998
*Ratio ofcumulativestock returnsrelativeto thegeneralstockmarket.
Phase 2: Compared to What?
Next, we took perhaps the most important step in the entire research
effort: contrastingthe good-to-greatcompaniesto a carefullyselectedset
of "comparisoncompanies."The crucial question in our study is not,
What did thegood-to-greatcompaniessharein common? Rather,the cru
cial questionis, What did thegood-to-greatcompaniesshare in common
that distinguishedthem from the comparisoncompanies?Think of it this
way: Supposeyou wantedto studywhatmakes gold medalwinnersin the
Olympic Games. If you only studied the gold medal winners by them-8 ]im Collins
selves,you'd find that they all hadcoaches.But if youlooked at the ath
letesthat made the Olympicteam, but neverwona medal,you'd find that
they also had coaches! The key question is, What systematicallydistin
guishesgold medal winnersfrom those who neverwon a medal?
We selectedtwo sets of comparisoncompanies.The first set consisted
of "direct comparisons"—companiesthat were in the same industry as
the good-to-greatcompanieswith the same opportunitiesand similar
resourcesat the time of transition,but that showed no leap from good to
great. (See AppendixLB for detailsofour selectionprocess.)The second
consistedof "unsustainedcomparisons"—companiesthat made a short-
term shift from good to great but failed to maintain the trajectory—to
addressthe questionofsustainability.(SeeAppendixl.C.) In all,this gave
us a total studyset of twenty-eightcompanies:eleven good-to-greatcom
panies,elevendirectcomparisons,and six unsustainedcomparisons.
IILE.EMTIIlEJmiJULMI -
Good-to-GreatCompanies Direct Comparisons
Abbott Upjohn
Circuit City Silo
Fannie Mae Great Western
Gillette Warner-Lambert
Kimberly-Clark Scott Paper
Kroger A&P
Nucor Bethlehem Steel
Philip Morris R. J.Reynolds
Pitney Bowes Addressograph
Walgreens Eckerd
Wells Fargo Bankof America
UnsustainedComparisons
Burroughs
Chrysler
Harris
Hasbro
Rubbermaid
TeledyneGood to Great
Phase 3: Inside the Black Box
We then turned our attention to a deep analysis of each case. We col
lected all articlespublished on the twenty-eightcompanies,dating back
fifty years or more. We systematicallycoded all the material into cate
gories, such as strategy, technology,leadership,and so forth. Then we
interviewedmostofthe good-to-greatexecutiveswhoheld keypositionsof
responsibilityduring the transitionera. We also initiateda wide range of
qualitativeand quantitativeanalyses,lookingat everythingfrom acquisi
tions to executivecompensation,from businessstrategyto corporate cul
ture, from layoffsto leadershipstyle,from financialratiosto management
turnover. When all was said and done, the total project consumed 10.5
peopleyears of effort.We read andsystematicallycoded nearly6,000 arti
cles, generated more than 2,000 pages of interviewtranscripts,and cre
ated 384million bytesofcomputer data. (SeeAppendixl.D fora detailed
list of all ouranalysesand activities.)
We came to think ofourresearcheffortasakinto lookinginsidea black
box. Each step alongthe way was like installinganotherlightbulbto shed
lighton the inner workingsofthe good-to-greatprocess.
Good Results
Great Results
What's Inside
the
Black Box?
With data in hand, we began aseries of weekly research-teamdebates.
For each of the twenty-eightcompanies,members of the research team
and I would systematicallyread all the articles,analyses,interviews,and
the researchcoding.I would make a presentationto the team on that spe
cificcompany,drawingpotentialconclusionsand askingquestions.Then
we would debate,disagree,pound on tables, raise our voices, pause and10 Jim Collins
reflect,debatesomemore,pauseand think, discuss,resolve,question,and
debate yet again about "whatit allmeans."
The core of our method was a systematicprocess of contrasting the
good-to-greatexamplesto the comparisons,always asking,"What's differ
ent?"
We also made particularnote of"dogs that did not bark." In the Sher
lock Holmes classic "The Adventureof Silver Blaze" Holmes identified
"the curiousincident ofthe dogin the night-time"as the keyclue. It turns
out that the dog did nothing in the nighttime and that, according to
Holmes, was the curious incident, which led him to the conclusion that
the primesuspectmusthave been someonewhoknewthe dog well.
In ourstudy,whatwe didn'tfind—dogsthat wemight haveexpectedto
bark but didn't—turned out to be some of the best clues to the inner work
ings of good to great. When we stepped inside the black box and turned
on the lightbulbs,we werefrequentlyjustas astonishedat what we didnot
see as what we did. Forexample:
• Larger-than-life,celebrity leaders who ride in from the outside are
negativelycorrelatedwith takinga companyfrom good togreat. Ten
of eleven good-to-great CEOs came from inside the company,
whereas the comparison companies tried outside CEOs six times
more often.
• We found no systematicpattern linking specific forms of executive
compensation to the process of going from good to great. The idea
that the structure ofexecutivecompensationis a keydriverin corpo
rate performance is simplynot supported by the data.
• Strategyper se did notseparatethe good-to-greatcompaniesfrom the
comparison companies. Both sets of companies had well-defined
strategies,and there is no evidencethat the good-to-greatcompanies
spent more time on long-rangestrategicplanning than the compari
son companies.Good to Great 11
• The good-to-greatcompaniesdid not focus principallyon what todo
to become great;they focused equallyon what notto do and what to
stop doing.
• Technologyand technology-drivenchangehas virtuallynothingto do
with ignitinga transformationfrom good to great. Technologycan
acceleratea transformation,but technologycannot cause a transfor
mation.
• Mergersand acquisitionsplay virtuallyno role in ignitinga transfor
mationfrom good togreat;two bigmediocritiesjoinedtogethernever
makeone great company.
• The good-to-great companies paid scant attention to managing
change, motivatingpeople, or creatingalignment. Under the right
conditions,the problemsofcommitment,alignment,motivation,and
change largelymelt away.
• The good-to-greatcompanieshad noname,tagline, launchevent,or
programto signifytheirtransformations.Indeed,some reportedbeing
unaware of the magnitude of the transformationat the time; only
later,in retrospect,didit becomeclear.Yes, they produceda trulyrev
olutionaryleap inresults,but not bya revolutionaryprocess.
• The good-to-greatcompanieswere not, by and large, in great indus
tries, and some were in terrible industries. In no case do we have a
companythat justhappenedto besittingon thenose cone ofa rocket
when it took off. Greatness is not a function of circumstance. Great
ness, it turns out, islargelya matterof consciouschoice.
Phase 4: Chaos to Concept
I've triedto come up with a simpleway toconveywhatwas requiredto go
from all the data, analyses,debates,and "dogs that did notbark" to the
final findingsin this book. The bestanswerI cangive is thatit was an iter
ative processofloopingbackandforth, developingideasand testingthem
againstthe data, revisingthe ideas, buildinga framework,seeingit break
under the weight of evidence,and rebuildingit yetagain. That process
was repeatedover and over, until everythinghung togetherin a coherent
frameworkofconcepts.We allhave a strengthortwo in life,and Isuppose
mine is the ability to take a lump of unorganizedinformation,see pat
terns,and extractorderfrom the mess—togo from chaosto concept.
That said, however,I wish to underscoreagain thatthe conceptsin the
final frameworkare not my "opinions."While I cannot extractmy own12 Jim Collins
psychologyand biasesentirelyfrom the research,each finding in the final
frameworkmet a rigorousstandardbeforethe researchteam would deem
it significant.Everyprimaryconcept in the finalframeworkshowed up as
a change variablein 100 percent of thegood-to-greatcompaniesand in
less than 30 percent of the comparison companies during the pivotal
years. Any insight thatfailed this test did not make it into the book as a
chapter-levelconcept.
Here, then, is an overviewof the frameworkof concepts and a preview
of what'sto come in the restof thebook. (See thediagrambelow.)Think
of the transformationas a process of buildup followed by breakthrough,
broken into three broad stages: disciplined people, disciplined thought,
and disciplinedaction. Within each of these threestages, there are two
key concepts,shown in the frameworkand describedbelow. Wrapping
around this entire frameworkis a concept we came to call the flywheel,
which captures the gestalt of the entire process of going from good to
great.
Level 5 First Who ... Confront the Hedgehog Culture of Technology
Leadership Then What Brutal Facts Concept Discipline Accelerators
Level 5 Leadership.We were surprised,shocked really, to discoverthe
type of leadership required for turning a good company into a great one.
Compared to high-profileleaderswith big personalitieswho make head
linesand become celebrities,the good-to-greatleadersseem to have come
from Mars. Self-effacing,quiet, reserved, even shy—these leaders are aGood to Great 13
paradoxicalblend of personal humilityand professionalwill. They are
more like Lincoln and Socrates than Patton or Caesar.
FirstWho ... Then What We expectedthatgood-to-greatleaderswould
beginby settinga new visionand strategy.We found insteadthattheyfirst
gotthe rightpeopleonthe bus, the wrongpeopleoffthe bus,and the right
peoplein therightseats—andthen theyfiguredoutwhere to drive it.The
old adage "Peopleare your most importantasset" turns out to bewrong.
Peoplearenot your most importantasset. The right peopleare.
Confrontthe BrutalFacts (Yet NeverLose Faith). We learnedthat afor
mer prisonerofwar had more toteach us aboutwhat ittakes tofind a path
to greatness than most books on corporate strategy. Every good-to-great
company embraced what we came to call the StockdaleParadox:You must
maintainunwaveringfaith thatyou can and will prevailinthe end, regard
less ofthe difficulties,AND at the same time have the disciplineto con
frontthe mostbrutalfacts ofyour currentreality,whateverthey mightbe.
The Hedgehog Concept (Simplicitywithin the Three Circles). To go
from good to great requires transcendingthe curse of competence.Just
becausesomethingis your core business—justbecauseyou'vebeen doing
it for years or perhapseven decades—doesnotnecessarilymean you can
be the bestin theworldat it.And ifyou cannotbe the bestin theworld at
your core business,then your core business absolutelycannotform the
basis ofa great company.It must be replacedwith a simple conceptthat
reflectsdeep understandingofthree intersectingcircles.
A CultureofDiscipline.All companieshave a culture,some companies
have discipline,butfew companieshave acultureofdiscipline.When you
have disciplinedpeople,you don'tneed hierarchy.When you have disci
plinedthought,you don'tneed bureaucracy.When you have disciplined
action,you don'tneed excessivecontrols.Whenyou combinea cultureof
disciplinewith anethicofentrepreneurship,you getthe magicalalchemy
of greatperformance.
Technology Accelerators. Good-to-great companies think differently
about the role oftechnology.They never use technologyas the primary
means ofignitinga transformation.Yet, paradoxically,they arepioneers
in the applicationof carefully selected technologies.We learned that14 Jim Collins
technologyby itselfis never aprimary,root cause of eithergreatnessor
decline.
TheFlywheeland the DoomLoop. Those who launchrevolutions,dra
matic change programs, and wrenching restructuringswill almost cer
tainlyfail to makethe leap from good to great. No matter howdramatic
the end result, the good-to-greattransformationsnever happened in one
fell swoop. There was no single definingaction, no grand program, no
one killer innovation, no solitary lucky break, no miracle moment.
Rather,the processresembledrelentlesslypushinga giantheavyflywheel
in one direction, turn upon turn, building momentum until a point of
breakthrough,and beyond.
From Good to Great to Built to Last In an ironic twist, I now see Good to
Great not as a sequelto Builtto Last, but as more ofa prequel.Thisbook is
abouthow toturna goodorganizationintoonethat producessustainedgreat
results.Builtto Last isabout how you take a companywith greatresultsand
turn itinto an enduringgreatcompanyoficonicstature.To make thatfinal
shift requirescore values and a purpose beyond just making money com
binedwith the key dynamicofpreservethe core/ stimulateprogress.
Good to Sustained Builtto Enduring
Great -> Great f Last -> Great
Concepts Results Concepts Company
If you arealreadya studentof Built to Last, pleaseset aside your ques
tions aboutthe preciselinksbetweenthe two studiesasyou embarkupon
the findingsin Good to Great. In thelastchapter,I returnto this question
and link the twostudiestogether.
THE TIMELESS "PHYSICS" OF GOOD TO GREAT
I had just finishedpresentingmy researchto a set of Internetexecutives
gatheredat aconference,when a hand shot up. "Will your findingscon
tinue toapply in the new economy?Don't we need tothrow out all the
oldideasandstartfrom scratch?"It'sa legitimatequestion,aswedo live in
a time of dramaticchange,and it comes up so often that I'd like to dis
pensewith it rightup front, beforeheadingintothe meatofthe book.Good to Great 15
Yes, the world ischanging,and will continueto doso. Butthat does not
mean we should stop the search for timeless principles.Think of it this
way: While the practicesofengineeringcontinuallyevolve and change,
the laws of physicsremain relativelyfixed. I like to think of ourwork as a
search for timeless principles—theenduring physics of great organiza
tions—that will remain true and relevant no matter how the world
changes around us. Yes, the specific applicationwill change (the engi
neering),but certain immutablelaws oforganizedhuman performance
(the physics)will endure.
Thetruth is, there'snothingnew aboutbeingina new economy.Those
who faced the inventionofelectricity,thetelephone,the automobile,the
radio, or the transistor—didthey feel it was any less ofa new economy
than we feel today?And in each renditionofthe new economy,the best
leadershave adheredto certainbasic principles,with rigorand discipline.
Some peoplewill pointoutthatthe scale and pace ofchangeis greater
today than anytimein the past. Perhaps.Even so, some ofthe companies
in ourgood-to-greatstudyfaced rates ofchangethat rival anythingin the
new economy.For example,duringthe early 1980s,the bankingindustry
was completelytransformedin about three years, as the full weight of
deregulationcame crashingdown. Itwas certainlya new economyfor the
bankingindustry!Yet Wells Fargoappliedeverysinglefindinginthis book
to produce great results, right smack in the middle of the fast-paced
changetriggeredbyderegulation.
$corningchapters,keep one keypoint ,
t the oldeconomy,Nor is it about the :
^^^^^s^isomy.^|t_iSc-ridi'-even sibout the companiesyou're reading
•t-l-^G^ It isultimatelyaboutope thing:;
g£ttfr^ about how you take a
y^^^P^^^.^^ ftrh'.itJntoonethatproducessustainedgreat
;#"Ww^ best applies to your .
This mightcome as asurprise,butI don'tprimarilythinkofmy work as
aboutthe study ofbusiness,nor do I see this as fundamentallya business
book. Rather, I see my work as being about discoveringwhat creates
enduringgreat organizationsof any type. I'm curious to understandthe16 Jim Collins
fundamentaldifferencesbetweengreatand good, betweenexcellentand
mediocre.I justhappen to use corporationsas a means of gettinginside
the blackbox. I do thisbecausepubliclytradedcorporations,unlike other
types of organizations,have two huge advantagesfor research: a widely
agreed upon definitionofresults (so we can rigorouslyselecta studyset)
and a plethoraofeasilyaccessibledata.
That good is the enemy ofgreat is not just a businessproblem.It is a
human problem.Ifwe have crackedthe code on thequestionofgood to
great, we should have somethingof value to any type of organization.
Good schools might become great schools. Good newspapers might
becomegreatnewspapers.Good churchesmightbecomegreatchurches.
Goodgovernmentagenciesmightbecomegreatagencies.And good com
paniesmight become greatcompanies.
So, I inviteyou to joinmeonan intellectualadventuretodiscoverwhat
ittakes toturn good into great. I also encourageyou toquestionandchal
lengewhatyou learn.As one ofmy favoriteprofessorsoncesaid,"Thebest
studentsarethosewho neverquitebelievetheirprofessors."True enough.
But he also said, "One ought not to rejectthe data merely because one
does not like what the data implies."I offer everythingherein for your
thoughtful consideration,not blind acceptance.You're the judge and
jury. Let theevidencespeak.C H A P T E R
First Who ... Confront the Hedgehog Culture of Technology
1 Then What Brutal Facts Concept Discipline Accelerators
You can accomplishanythingin life, providedthat youdo not
mind who getsthe credit.
— Harry S. Truman1
1$8n 1971, a seemingly ordinary man named Darwin E. Smith became
chief executive of Kimberly-Clark,a stodgy old paper company whose
stock had fallen 36 percentbehindthe generalmarketover the previous
twenty years.
Smith, the company'smild-manneredin-houselawyer, wasn't so sure
the boardhad madethe rightchoice—afeelingfurtherreinforcedwhena
director pulled Smith asideand reminded him that he lacked some of the
qualificationsfor the position.2But CEO he was, and CEO he remained
for twentyyears.
What a twenty years it was. In thatperiod, Smith createda stunning
transformation,turning Kimberly-Clarkinto the leading paper-based
consumerproductscompanyin the world. Under hisstewardship,Kim
berly-Clarkgeneratedcumulativestockreturns4.1 timesthe generalmar
ket, handily beating its direct rivals Scott Paper and Procter & Gamble18 Jim Collins
and outperforming such venerable companies as Coca-Cola, Hewlett-
Packard, 3M, and General Electric.
It was an impressiveperformance,one ofthe bestexamplesin the twen
tieth century oftakinga good companyand makingit great.Yet few peo
ple—evenardent studentsof managementand corporatehistory—know
anythingabout DarwinSmith. He probablywould have liked it thatway.
A man who carried no airs of self-importance,Smith found his favorite
companionshipamongplumbersand electriciansand spent hisvacations
rumbling around his Wisconsinfarm in the cab of a backhoe, digging
holes and moving rocks.3 He never cultivatedhero status or executive
celebritystatus.4When a journalistasked him to describe his manage
ment style, Smith, dressedunfashionablylike afarm boywearinghis first
suit bought at J. C. Penney, just stared back from the other side of his
nerdy-lookingblack-rimmedglasses.After a long,uncomfortablesilence,
he said simply: "Eccentric."5The Wall Street Journal did not write a
splashyfeatureon DarwinSmith.
But ifyouwere to think ofDarwinSmithas somehowmeek orsoft,you
would be terriblymistaken.His awkwardshynessand lack of pretensewas
coupled with afierce, even stoic, resolvetoward life. Smith grew up as a
poor Indianafarm-townboy, puttinghimselfthrough collegeby working
the day shiftat InternationalHarvesterand attendingIndiana University
at night.One day, he lostpartofa fingeron thejob. The storygoes that he
went toclass that eveningand returnedto work the next day. While that
might be a bit of anexaggeration,he clearlydid not let a lostfingerslow
down his progresstoward graduation.He keptworkingfull-time,he kept
goingtoclass at night,and he earnedadmissiontoHarvardLaw School.6
Later in life,two months after becomingCEO, doctorsdiagnosedSmith
with nose and throat cancer,predictinghe had less than a yearto live. He
informedthe board but made it clear that hewas not dead yet and had no
plansto dieanytimesoon. Smithheld fullyto his demandingwork sched
ule while commuting weekly from Wisconsinto Houston for radiation
therapyandlivedtwenty-fivemore years,most ofthem as CEO.7
Smith brought that same ferocious resolve to rebuilding Kimberly-
Clark, especiallywhen he made themost dramaticdecisionin the com
pany's history: Sell the mills.8 Shortlyafter he became CEO, Smith and
his team had concluded that the traditional core business—coated
paper—wasdoomedto mediocrity.Its economicswere bad and the com
petitionweak.9 But, theyreasoned,ifKimberly-Clarkthrustitselfinto the$40
$30
$20
$10
1951
$40
1971
Good to Great 19
Before Darwin Smith
Kimberly-Clark, Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1951 -1971
Darwin Smith Tenure
Kimberly-Clark, Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1971 -1991
General Market:
$8.30
Kimberly-Clark:
$5.30
1971
Kimberly-Clark:
$39.87
General Market:
$9.81
199120 Jim Collins
LEV|I^^^^^TIVEBuilgl|l^^^%j^ta^lthroughaparadoxical
b\eW0f^^M0i^k^l\\y and professional
Level 5 Hierarchy
fire of theconsumerpaper-productsindustry,world-classcompetitionlike
Procter& Gamble wouldforce it toachievegreatnessor perish.
So, like the generalwho burned the boats upon landing,leavingonly
one option (succeed or die), Smith announced the decision to sell the
mills, in whatone board membercalledthe gutsiestmove he'd ever seen
a CEO make. Sell even the mill in Kimberly,Wisconsin,and throw all
the proceedsinto the consumerbusiness,investingin brandslike Huggies
and Kleenex.10
The business media called the move stupid and Wall Street analysts
downgraded the stock.11 Smith never wavered. Twenty-fiveyears later,
Kimberly-Clarkowned Scott Paper outrightand beat Procter & Gamble
in six of eightproductcategories.12In retirement,Smith reflectedon his
exceptional performance, saying simply, "I never stopped trying to
become qualifiedfor the job."13Good to Great 21
NOT WHAT WE EXPECTED
Darwin Smith stands as aclassicexampleof what we came to call a Level
5 leader—an individual who blends extreme personal humility with
intense professionalwill. We found leaders of this type at the helm of
every good-to-greatcompany during the transition era. Like Smith, they
were self-effacingindividualswho displayedthe fierce resolveto do what
ever needed to be done to make the companygreat.
;\:rLe)/§f5leader^eh^frielth^ir ego:riBedsaway from themselvesand
£.$li^ notihatLevel 5,
i^l|2Ug|^$-|B^^^Jja#t9j&i^C#o^^^^^Si^se^%axM^vito>rae&73Rrafipf'for #?$ Institution,not
The term Level 5 refers to the highestlevel in a hierarchy ofexecutive
capabilitiesthat we identifiedin our research.(See the diagramon page
20.) While you don't need to move in sequence from Level 1 to Level
5—it might be possible to fill in some of the lower levels later—fully
developed Level 5 leaders embody allfive layersof the pyramid. I am not
goingto belabor all five levels here, asLevels 1 through 4 aresomewhat
self-explanatoryand are discussed extensively by other authors. This
chapter willfocus insteadon the distinguishingtraitsof the good-to-great
leaders—namely level 5traits—in contrast to the comparison leaders in
our study.
But first, please permit a brief digressionto set an important context.
We were not lookingfor Level 5 leadershipor anything like it. In fact, I
gave the research team explicitinstructionsto downplay the role of top
executives so that we could avoid the simplistic "credit the leader" or
"blame the leader" thinking commontoday.
To usean analogy,the "Leadershipisthe answerto everything"perspec
tive isthe modern equivalentofthe "God isthe answerto everything"per
spectivethat held back ourscientificunderstandingof the physicalworld
in the Dark Ages. In the 1500s, people ascribed all events they didn't
understand to God. Why did thecrops fail? God did it. Why did we have
an earthquake? God did it. What holdsthe planets in place? God. But with22 Jim Collins
the Enlightenment,we beganthe searchfor a more scientificunderstand
ing—physics,chemistry,biology,and soforth. Not that we became athe
ists, but wegaineddeeperunderstandingabouthowthe universeticks.
Similarly,everytime we attributeeverythingto "Leadership,"we're no
differentfrom peoplein the1500s.We'resimplyadmittingour ignorance.
Not thatwe should become leadershipatheists(leadershipdoes matter),
but every time we throw our hands up in frustration—revertingback to
"Well,theanswermustbeLeadership!"—wepreventourselvesfrom gain
ing deeper, more scientificunderstandingabout what makes great com
panies tick.
So,earlyin theproject,I keptinsisting,"Ignorethe executives."But the
researchteam keptpushingback, "No! There is somethingconsistently
unusual about them. We can'tignore them." And I'd respond,"But the
comparisoncompanies also had leaders, even some great leaders. So,
what'sdifferent?"Back and forth the debateraged.
Finally—asshould alwaysbe the case—thedata won.
The good-to-greatexecutiveswere all cutfrom the same cloth. It didn't
matter whether the company was consumer or industrial, in crisis or
steadystate, offeredservicesor products.It didn't matter when the transi
tion took place or howbig thecompany.All the good-to-greatcompanies
had Level 5 leadershipat the time oftransition.Furthermore, the absence
ofLevel 5leadershipshowedup asa consistentpatternin the comparison
companies.Given that Level 5 leadershipcuts againstthe grain of con
ventionalwisdom, especiallythe beliefthat we need larger-than-lifesav
iors with bigpersonalitiesto transformcompanies,it is importantto note
that Level 5 isan empiricalfinding,not an ideologicalone.
HUMILITY + WILL = LEVEL 5
Level 5 leaders are a study in duality: modest and willful, humble and
fearless. To quicklygrasp this concept, think of United States President
AbrahamLincoln (one of the few Level 5 presidentsin United Stateshis
tory),who never let his ego get in theway of his primaryambition for the
larger cause of an enduring great nation.Yet those whomistookMr. Lin
coln's personal modesty, shy nature, and awkward manner as signs of
weaknessfound themselvesterriblymistaken,to the scale of 250,000Con
federateand 360,000Unionlives, includingLincoln'sown.14Good to Great 23
While it might be a bit ofastretchto comparethe good-to-greatCEOs
to AbrahamLincoln, they diddisplaythe sameduality.Consider the case
of Colman Mockler, CEO of Gillette from 1975 to 1991. During Mock-
ler's tenure, Gillette faced three attacks that threatened to destroy the
company'sopportunityforgreatness.Twoattackscame ashostiletakeover
bids fromRevlon,led by Ronald Perelman,a cigar-chompingraider with
a reputationfor breakingapart companiesto pay down junk bonds and
finance more hostile raids.15 The third attack came from Coniston Part
ners, an investmentgroup that bought 5.9 percent of Gillettestock and
initiated a proxy battle to seize control of the board, hoping to sell the
companyto thehighestbidderand pocketa quick gain on theirshares.16
Had Gillette beenflippedto Perelmanat the price he offered,shareown-
ers would have reapedan instantaneous44 percentgain on theirstock.17
Lookingat a$2.3 billionshort-termstockprofitacross 116 millionshares,
most executiveswould have capitulated, pocketing millions from flipping
their own stockand cashingin ongenerousgoldenparachutes.18
Colman Mockler did not capitulate, choosing instead to fight for the
future greatnessof Gillette,eventhough he himselfwouldhave pocketed
a substantial sum on his own shares. A quiet and reserved man, always
courteous,Mocklerhad the reputationofa gracious,almostpatriciangen
tleman. Yet those who mistook Mockler's reserved nature for weakness
found themselvesbeaten in the end. In the proxy fight, senior Gillette
executives reached out to thousands of individual investors—person by
person, phone call by phone call—and won the battle.
Now, you might be thinking, "But that just sounds like self-serving
entrenched management fighting for their interests at the expense of
shareholderinterests."On the surface,it mightlookthat way, but consider
two keyfacts.
First,Mocklerand his team stakedthe company'sfuture on huge invest
ments in radicallynew andtechnologicallyadvancedsystems(laterknown
as Sensor and Mach3). Had the takeoverbeen successful, these projects
would almost certainly have been curtailed or eliminated, and none of us
would be shavingwith Sensor,SensorforWomen, or the Mach3—leaving
hundredsofmillionsofpeopletoa more painfuldailybattlewith stubble.19
Second, at the time of the takeoverbattle, Sensor promised significant
future profits that were not reflected in the stock price because it was in
secret development. With Sensor in mind, the board and Mockler
believed that the future value of the shares far exceeded thecurrent price,24 Jim Collins
Colman Mockler's Triumph
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, 1976 - 1996
Gillette versus Takeover Bid and Market
$100 Gillette: $95.68
$75
$50
$25
44% PremiumOfferedin y/ TakeoverBid
TakeoverBid /VU/ Performance:$30.40
General Market: $14.92
1976 1986 1996
This chart shows how an investor would have fared under the following scenarios:
1. $1 invested in Gillette, held from December 31,1976 through December 31,1996.
2. $1 invested in Gillette, held from December 31, 1976 but then sold to Ronald
Perelman for a 44.44% premium on October 31,1986, the proceeds then invested in
the general stock market.
3. $1 investedinGeneralMarketheldfrom December31,1976throughDecember31,1996.
even with the price premium offered by the raiders. To sell out would
have made short-termshareflippershappy but would have been utterly
irresponsibleto long-termshareholders.
In theend, Mocklerandthe boardwere provedright,stunninglyso. Ifa
shareflipperhad accepted the 44 percent price premium offered by
Ronald Perelman on October 31,1986, and then invested the full amount
in the general market for ten years, through the end of 1996, he would
have come out threetimes worse offthan a shareholderwho had stayed
with Mocklerand Gillette.20Indeed,the company,its customers,and the
shareholderswould have been illserved had Mocklercapitulatedto the
raiders,pocketed his millions,and retired to a life of leisure.
Sadly, Mocklerwas neverable to enjoy the full fruits of his effort. On
January25, 1991,the Gilletteteamreceivedan advancecopyofthe cover
of Forbes magazine, which featured anartist'srendition of Mockler stand
ing atop amountainholdinga giantrazor above his head in atriumphal
pose, while the vanquished languish on the hillsidesbelow. The otherGood to Great 25
executives razzed the publicity-shyMockler, who had likely declined
requeststo be photographedforthe coverin the first place, amused at see
ing him portrayedas a corporateversionof Conan the Triumphant. Walk
ing back to hisoffice,minutes afterseeingthis public acknowledgmentof
his sixteenyearsofstruggle,Mocklercrumpled to the floor,struckdead by
a massive heart attack.21
I do not know whether Mockler would have chosen to die in harness,
but I am quite confident that he would not have changed his approach as
chief executive.His placid persona hid an inner intensity,a dedication to
making anything he touched the best it could possibly be—not just
because of what he would get, but because he simply couldn't imagine
doing it any other way. It wouldn't have been an option within Colman
Mockler'svalue systemto takethe easy path and turn the company overto
those who would milk it like a cow, destroyingits potential to become
great, any more than it would have been an option for Lincoln to sue for
peace and loseforeverthe chance ofan enduring great nation.
Ambition for the Company: Setting Up Successors
for Success
When David Maxwellbecame CEO of Fannie Mae in 1981,the company
was losing$1 million every single businessday. Overthe next nine years,
Maxwell transformedFannie Mae into a high-performanceculture that
rivaled the best Wall Street firms, earning $4 millionevery businessday
and beatingthe generalstockmarket3.8to 1. Maxwellretiredwhile stillat
the top of his game, feeling that the company would be ill served if he
stayedon too long,and turned the companyoverto an equallycapablesuc
cessor, Jim Johnson. Shortly thereafter, Maxwell's retirement package,
whichhad grown to beworth $20millionbased on Fannie Mae'sspectac
ularperformance,becamea pointof controversyin Congress(FannieMae
operatesunder a governmentcharter).Maxwellrespondedbywritinga let
ter to his successor, in which he expressedconcern that the controversy
wouldtriggeran adversereactionin Washingtonthat could jeopardizethe
future of the company. He then instructedJohnson not to pay him the
remaining balance—$5.5million—andasked that the entire amount be
contributedto theFannieMaefoundationfor low-incomehousing.22
DavidMaxwell,like DarwinSmithand Colman Mockler,exemplifieda
key trait of Level 5 leaders: ambition first and foremostfor the company
and concern for its successrather than for one's own riches and personal26 Jim Collins
renown.Level 5 leaderswantto see thecompanyeven moresuccessfulin
the nextgeneration,comfortablewith the ideathat mostpeoplewon'teven
know that the roots of that success trace back to their efforts. As one Level 5
leadersaid, "I want to look out from my porch at one ofthe greatcompa
nies in theworldsomedayand be ableto say, 1 usedto work there.' "
In contrast, the comparisonleaders, concerned more with their own
reputation for personalgreatness,often failed to set the company up for
successin the nextgeneration.Afterall,whatbettertestamentto yourown
personalgreatnessthan that the placefalls apartafteryou leave?
Some had the"biggestdog" syndrome—theydidn't mind other dogs in
the kennel, as long as they remained the biggestone. One comparison
CEO was said to have treated successorcandidates"the way Henry the
VIII treated wives."23
Consider the case of Rubbermaid,an unsustained comparison com
pany that grew fromobscurityto number one on Fortune'sannual list of
America'sMost Admired Companies and then, just as quickly, disinte
grated into suchsorryshapethat it had to be acquired byNewell to save
itself.The architect of this remarkable story, a charismatic and brilliant
leader named Stanley Gault, becamesynonymousin the late 1980swith
the success of the company. In 312 articles collected on Rubbermaid,
Gault comes through as a hard-driving,egocentric executive. In one
article, he responds to the accusation of being a tyrant with the state
ment, "Yes, but I'm a sincere tyrant."24In another, drawn directlyfrom
his owncommentson leadingchange,the wordI appearsforty-fourtimes
("I could lead the charge"; "I wrote the twelve objectives";"I presented
and explained the objectives"),whereasthe word we appears just sixteen
times.25 Gault had every reason to be proud of his executive success.
Rubbermaid generated forty consecutive quarters of earnings growth
under his leadership—an impressiveperformance, and one that deserves
respect.
But—and this is the keypoint—Gaultdid not leavebehind a company
that would be great without him. His chosen successor lasted only oneGood to Great 27
yearon the job and the nextin line faced a managementteam so shallow
that he had totemporarilyshoulderfour jobs whilescramblingto identify
a new numbertwo executive.26Gault'ssuccessorsfound themselvesstrug
gling not only with a managementvoid, but also with strategicvoids that
would eventuallybringthe companyto its knees.27
Of course,you mightsay, "Yes, Rubbermaidfell apart after Gault, but
that just proves his personal greatnessas a leader." Exactly! Gault was
indeed a tremendous Level 4 leader, perhaps one of the best in the last
fifty years. But he was not aLevel 5 leader,and that is onekey reasonwhy
Rubbermaid went from good to great for a brief shining moment and
then, justas quickly,went from greatto irrelevant.
A Compelling Modesty
In contrast to the very/-centric style of the comparison leaders, we were
struckby how thegood-to-greatleadersdidnt talkabout themselves.Dur
ing interviewswith the good-to-greatleaders,they'd talk about the com
pany and the contributions of other executivesas long as we'd like but
would deflect discussionabout their own contributions. When pressed to
talkabout themselves,they'dsay thingslike,"I hope I'm not soundinglike
a big shot." Or, "If the board hadn't picked such great successors,you
probablywouldn't be talkingwith me today."Or, "Did I have a lot to do
with it? Oh, that sounds so self-serving.I don't think I can take much
credit. We wereblessedwith marvelouspeople."Or, "There are plenty of
people in this companywho could do my jobbetter than I do."
It wasn't justfalse modesty.Those whoworkedwith or wroteabout the
good-to-greatleaders continually used words like quiet, humble, modest,
reserved, shy, gracious, mild-mannered,self-effacing,understated,did not
believe his own clippings; and so forth. Board member Jim Hlavacek
described Ken Iverson, the CEO who oversaw Nucor's transformation
from near bankruptcyto one ofthe mostsuccessfulsteel companies in the
world:
Ken isa verymodest and humble man. I'veneverknown a person assuc
cessfulin doing what he's done that's asmodest.And, Iwork for a lot of
CEOs of large companies.And that's true in hisprivatelife as well.The
simplicityof him. I mean little thingslike he alwaysgets hisdogs at the
local pound. He has a simple house that's he's lived in for ages. He only
has a carport and he complained to me one dayabout how he had to use28 Jim Collins
his credit card to scrapethefrostoffhis windowsand he broke the credit
card. "You know, Ken, there's a solutionfor it; enclose your carport."
And he said, "Ah, heck, it isn'tthatbigofa deal " He'sthat humble
and simple.28
The eleven good-to-greatCEOs are some of the most remarkable
CEOs ofthe century,giventhatonlyelevencompaniesfrom the Fortune
500 met theexactingstandardsfor entry into this study.Yet, despitetheir
remarkable results, almost no one ever remarked about them! George
Cain, Alan Wurtzel, David Maxwell, Colman Mockler, Darwin Smith,
Jim Herring,Lyle Everingham,Joe Cullman,FredAllen,CorkWalgreen,
Carl Reichardt—howmany of these extraordinaryexecutives had you
heard of?
The good-to-greatleaders never wanted to become larger-than-life
heroes. They never aspiredto be put on a pedestalor become unreach
able icons.Theywere seeminglyordinarypeoplequietlyproducingextra
ordinary results.
Someofthe comparisonleadersprovidea strikingcontrast.ScottPaper,
the comparison company to Kimberly-Clark,hired a CEO named Al
Dunlap, a man cut from a very differentcloth than Darwin Smith. Dun-
lap loudly beat on his ownchest, telling anyone who would listen (and
manywho wouldprefernot to) aboutwhathe hadaccomplished.Quoted
in BusinessWeek about his nineteenmonthsatop ScottPaper,he boasted,
"The Scottstory will go down in theannalsofAmericanbusinesshistory
as one of themost successful,quickestturnaroundsever, [making] other
turnaroundspale by comparison."30
Accordingto BusinessWeek, Dunlap personallyaccrued $100 million
for 603 days of work at Scott Paper (that's $165,000per day), largelyby
slashingthe workforce,cuttingthe R&D budgetin half, and puttingthe
companyon growthsteroidsin preparationfor sale.31 AftersellingofftheGood to Great 29
companyand pocketinghis quickmillions,Dunlap wrote a book about
himself, in which he trumpeted his nickname Rambo in Pinstripes. "I
love the Rambo movies,"he wrote. "Here's a guywho has zero chance of
success and always wins. Rambo goes into situations against all odds,
expectingtogethis brainsblownout. Buthe doesn't.Atthe end oftheday
he succeeds, he gets rid of the bad guys. He creates peace out of war.
That's what I do, too."32 Darwin Smith may have enjoyed the mindless
Rambo moviesas well, but I suspecthe neverwalkedout of a theater and
said to his wife, "You know, I really relate to this Rambo character; he
reminds me of me."
GranteSithe §e<?tt^p^r.istQfy^Xspne.olth^^ofadmmaticjp, pur
study, birt its not arv isolatedcase. In over twothirdsof the compari-
rtpersonal ego that
^^bmpan^
We found this pattern particularlystrong in the unsustained compar
isons—cases where the company would show a leap in performance
under a talented yet egocentric leader, only to decline in lateryears. Lee
Iacocca, for example, saved Chrysler from the brink of catastrophe, per
forming one of the most celebrated (and deservedlyso) turnarounds in
American businesshistory.Chryslerrose to a height of 2.9 times the mar
ket at a point about halfway through his tenure. Then, however, he
divertedhis attention to makinghimselfone ofthe mostcelebrated CEOs
in American businesshistory.InvestorsBusinessDaily and the WallStreet
Journalchronicled how Iacocca appearedregularlyon talk shows like the
Today show and Larry King Live, personallystarred in over eighty com
mercials, entertained the idea of running for president of the United
States(quoted at one point, "RunningChryslerhas been a biggerjob than
running the country. ... I could handle the national economy in six
months"), and widely promoted his autobiography. The book, Iacocca,
soldsevenmillion copiesand elevatedhim to rockstarstatus,leading him
to be mobbed by thousandsof cheeringfans upon his arrival in Japan.34
Iacocca's personal stock soared, but in the second half of his tenure,
Chrysler'sstockfell 31 percent behind the general market.
Sadly, Iacocca had trouble leaving center stage and letting go of the
perks of executive kingship. He postponed his retirement so many times30 Jim Collins
that insidersat Chryslerbeganto joke that Iacoccastoodfor"I AmChair
manofChryslerCorporationAlways."35And when he didfinallyretire,he
demanded that the board continue to provide a private jet and stock
options.36Later,he joinedforceswith notedtakeoverartistKirk Kerkorian
to launch ahostiletakeoverbidfor Chrysler.37
Chrysler experienceda brief return to glory in the five years after
Iacocca'sretirement,but the company'sunderlyingweaknesseseventu
ally led to abuyoutby GermancarmakerDaimler-Benz.38Certainly,the
demise of Chrysleras a stand-alonecompany does not rest entirelyon
Iacocca'sshoulders(the nextgenerationofmanagementmadethe fateful
decision to sell the company to the Germans), but the fact remains:
Iacocca'sbrilliantturnaroundin the early 1980s did not prove to be sus
tainedand Chryslerfailed tobecomean enduringgreatcompany.
Unwavering Resolve ... to Do What Must Be Done
It is very important to grasp that Level 5 leadership is not just about
humility and modesty. It is equally about ferocious resolve, an almost
stoic determination to do whatever needs to be done to make the com
pany great.
Indeed, we debatedfor a long time on theresearchteam about how to
describe the good-to-greatleaders. Initially, we penciled in terms like
"selfless executive" and "servant leader." But members of the team vio
lently objected to thesecharacterizations.
"Those labels don't ring true," saidAnthonyChirikos. "It makes them
sound weak or meek,but that's not at all theway I think of Darwin Smith
or Colman Mockler.They would do almostanythingto make the com
pany great."
Then Eve Li suggested,"Whydon't we justcall them Level 5 leaders?
Ifwe put a label like'selfless'or 'servant'on them, peoplewill get entirely
the wrongidea. We need to get people to engagewith the whole concept,
to seeboth sidesofthe coin. Ifyouonlygetthe humilityside,you miss the
whole idea."
Level 5 leadersare fanaticallydriven, infectedwith an incurable need
to produce results. They will sell the mills or fire their brother, if that's
what ittakes to makethe companygreat.
When George Cain became CEO of Abbott Laboratories,it sat in the
bottom quartile of thepharmaceuticalindustry,a drowsy enterprisethatGood to Great 31
had lived for years off its cash cow, erythromycin.Cain didn't have an
inspiringpersonalityto galvanize the company, but he had something
much more powerful:inspiredstandards.He could not standmediocrity
in any form and was utterly intolerantof anyone who would accept the
idea thatgood isgood enough.Cain then setouttodestroyone ofthe key
causes of Abbott's mediocrity:nepotism. Systematicallyrebuilding both
the board and theexecutiveteam withthe bestpeople he could find, Cain
made it clear that neitherfamilytiesnor length oftenure would have any
thing to dowith whetheryou held a key positionin the company.If you
didn't have the capacityto become the bestexecutivein the industryin
yourspan ofresponsibility,thenyou would lose your paycheck.39
Such rigorous rebuilding might be expected from an outsider
brought in to turn thecompanyaround, but Cainwas an eighteen-year
veteran insider anda family member, the son of a previousAbbott pres
ident. Holiday gatherings were probablytense for a few years in the
Cain clan. ("Sorry I had to fire you. Want another slice of turkey?") In
the end, though, family members were quite pleased with the perfor
mance of their stock, for Cain set in motion a profitable growth
machine that, from its transition date in 1974 to 2000, created share
holder returns that beat the market4.5 to 1,handilyoutperformingindus
try superstarsMerck and Pfizer.
Upjohn, the direct comparison company to Abbott, also had family
leadership during the same era as George Cain. Unlike George Cain,
Upjohn'sCEO nevershowedthe same resolveto breakthe mediocrityof
nepotism.By the timeAbbotthad filledallkey seats with the bestpeople,
regardlessoffamilybackground,Upjohnstill had Blevelfamilymembers
holdingkey positions.40Virtuallyidenticalcompanieswith identicalstock
charts up to the point oftransition,Upjohn then fell 89 percent behind
Abbott over the nexttwenty-oneyears before capitulating in a merger to
Pharmacia in 1995.
As an interestingaside, Darwin Smith, Colman Mockler,and George
Cain came from inside the company.StanleyGault, Al Dunlap, and Lee
Iacocca rode in assaviorsfrom the outside,trumpets blaring. Thisreflects
a more systematicfindingfrom our study. The evidencedoes not support
the idea that you need an outside leader to come in and shake up the
place to go from good to great. In fact, going for a high-profileoutside
change agent isnegativelycorrelatedwith a sustainedtransformationfrom
good to great. (See Appendix2.A.)32 Jim Collins
A superb example of insider-drivenchange comes from Charles R.
"Cork"Walgreen3d, who transformeddowdyWalgreensinto a company
that outperformedthe stock marketbyover fifteen times from the end of
1975 to January 1, 2000.42 After years ofdialogueand debate within his
executive team about Walgreens' food-serviceoperations,Cork sensed
that the team had finallyreacheda watershedpointofclarityand under
standing: Walgreens'brightestfuture lay in convenientdrugstores,not
food service. Dan Jorndt, who succeededWalgreen as CEO in 1998,
describedwhathappened next:
Corksaid atone ofourplanningcommitteemeetings,"Okay,now I am
goingto draw the line in thesand. We aregoingto be out oftherestau
rant business completelyin five years." At the time, we had over five
hundredrestaurants.You could have heard a pindrop. He said, "I want
tolet everybodyknowtheclockis ticking " Six monthslater,we were
at our next planningcommitteemeetingand someone mentionedjust
in passingthatwe onlyhadfive yearsto be out oftherestaurantbusiness.
Corkwas nota real vociferousfellow. Hesortoftappedon thetableand
said, "Listen,you have four and a halfyears. I said you had five years six
monthsago. Now you'vegot four and a halfyears."Well, that next day,
things reallyclickedinto gear to windingdown our restaurantbusiness.
He neverwavered.He neverdoubted;he neversecond-guessed.43
Like Darwin Smith selling the mills at Kimberly-Clark,Cork Wal-
green's decision required stoic resolve. Not that food service was the
largestpart ofthe business(althoughit did add substantialprofits to the
bottomline).Thereal problemwas more emotional.Walgreenshad, after
all, inventedthe malted milkshakeand food servicewas a long-standing
familytraditiondatingback to hisgrandfather.Some food-serviceoutlets
were even named after the CEO himself—a restaurant chain named
Corky's.But nomatter,ifWalgreenshad to fly inthe face oflong-standing
familytradition in order to focus itsresourceswhere it could be the best inGood to Great 33
the world (convenient drugstores),Cork would do it. Quietly, doggedly,
simply.44
The quiet, dogged nature of Level 5 leaders showed up not only in big
decisions, like selling off the food-serviceoperations or fighting corpo
rate raiders, but also in a personalstyle of sheerworkmanlikediligence.
Alan Wurtzel, a second-generation family member who took over his
family's small company and turned it into Circuit City, perfectly cap
tured the gestalt of this trait. When asked about differences between
himself and his counterpart CEO at Circuit City's comparison company,
Wurtzel summed up: "The showhorseand the plowhorse—he was more
ofa show horse,whereasI was more ofa plow horse."45
The Window and the Mirror
Alan Wurtzel's plow horse comment is fascinatingin light of two other
facts. First,he holds a doctorof jurisprudencedegreefromYale—clearly,
his plow horse nature had nothing to do with a lack ofintelligence. Sec
ond, his plowhorse approachsetthe stagefortruly bestinshow results.Let
me put it this way: If you had tochoose between $1 investedin Circuit
Cityor $1 investedin GeneralElectricon theday that thelegendaryJack
Welch took overGE in 1981 and held to January 1, 2000,you would have
been betteroffwith CircuitCity—bysix times.46Nota bad performance,
for a plow horse.
You might expect that extraordinaryresultslike these would lead Alan
Wurtzel to discuss the brilliant decisions he made. But when we asked
him to list the top five factors in his company'stransformation,ranked by
importance, Wurtzel gave a surprising answer: The number one factor
was luck. "We were in a greatindustry,with the wind at our backs."
We pushed back, pointing out that we selected thegood-to-greatcom
panies based on performance thatsurpassedtheir industry'saverage.Fur
thermore, the comparison company(Silo) was in the same industry,with
the same wind and probablybigger sails! We debated the point for a few
minutes, with Wurtzel continuing his preference for attributing much of
his successto just being in the right place at the right time. Later, when
askedto discussthe factorsbehind the enduring nature of thetransforma
tion, he said,"The firstthing that comesto mind isluck.... I was luckyto
find the rightsuccessor."47
Luck. What an odd factor to talk about. Yet the good-to-greatexecu
tives talked a lot about luck in our interviews. In one interview with a34 Jim Collins
Nucor executive,we asked why the company had such a remarkable
track record of good decisions; he responded: "I guess we were just
lucky."48Joseph F. Cullman 3d, the Level 5 transitionCEO of Philip
Morris,flat-outrefusedto take creditfor his company'ssuccess,attribut
inghis good fortuneto havinggreatcolleagues,successors,and predeces
sors.49Even thebook he wrote—abook he undertookat theurgingofhis
colleagues, which he never intended to distribute widely outside the
company—hadthe unusual title Ym a Lucky Guy. The opening para
graph reads: "I was a very lucky guy from the very beginningof mylife:
marvelous parents, good genes, lucky in love, lucky in business, and
lucky when aYale classmatehad myorders changedto report toWash
ington, D.C., in early 1941, instead of to a ship that was sunk with all
handslostin the NorthAtlantic,luckyto be in theNavy, and luckyto be
alive at eighty-five."50
We were at first puzzledby this emphasison good luck. After all, we
found no evidence that the good-to-greatcompanies were blessed with
more good luck (or more badluck, for that matter)than the comparison
companies.Then we beganto noticea contrastingpatternin thecompar
ison executives:They creditedsubstantialblame to bad luck, frequendy
bemoaningthe difficultiesofthe environmenttheyfaced.
Compare Bethlehem Steel to Nucor. Bothcompaniesoperated in the
steel industryand produced hard-to-differentiateproducts.Both compa
nies faced the competitivechallengeof cheapimportedsteel.Yet execu
tives at the two companies had completelydifferentviews of the same
environment.BethlehemSteel'sCEO summed up the company'sprob
lems in 1983 byblamingimports:"Our first, second,and third problems
are imports."51Ken Iverson and his crew at Nucor consideredthe same
challengefrom imports a blessing, a stroke of good fortune ("Aren'twe
lucky;steel isheavy,and theyhave to shipit all theway acrossthe ocean,
giving us a huge advantage!").Iverson saw the first, second, and third
problemsfacing the Americansteel industrynot to be imports,but man
agement.52He even went so far as to speak out publiclyagainstgovern
ment protectionagainst imports, telling a stunned gathering of fellow
steel executivesin 1977 that thereal problemsfacing the Americansteel
industry lay in the fact that management had failed to keep pace with
innovation.53
The emphasison luck turns out to be part of a pattern that we came to
call the window and the mirror.Good to Great 35
The comparisonleadersdid justthe opposite.They'd lookout the win
dow for something or someone outside themselves to blame for poor
results,but would preen in front oftlj,e mirrorand credit themselveswhen
things went well. Strangely,the window and the mirror do not reflect
objectivereality. Everyone outside the window points inside, directlyat
the Level 5 leader, saying, "He was the key; without his guidance and
leadership,wewouldnothave becomea greatcompany."Andthe Level 5
leader points right back out thewindow and says, "Look at all the great
peopleand good fortunethat madethis possible;I'm aluckyguy."They're
both right,ofcourse.Butthe Level 5s would neveradmitthat fact.
CULTIVATING LEVEL 5 LEADERSHIP
Not longago, I sharedthe Level 5findingwith a gatheringofsenior exec
utives. A woman who had recently become chief executiveof her com
pany raised her hand and said, "I believe what you say about the
good-to-greatleaders.But I'm disturbedbecausewhen I look in the mir
ror, I know that I'm not Level 5, not yet anyway. Part of the reason I got
this job is because of my egodrives.Are you telling me that I can't make
this a greatcompanyif I'm notLevel 5?"
"I don'tknow forcertainthat you absolutelymust be aLevel 5 leaderto
make yourcompanygreat,"I replied."I will simplypointbackto the data:
Of 1,435 companies that appeared on the Fortune 500 in our initial can
didate list, only eleven made thevery tough cut into our study. In those
eleven,all of them hadLevel 5 leadershipin key positions,including the
CEO, at the pivotaltime oftransition."
She sat there, quiet for moment, and you could tell everyone in the
room was mentallyurgingher to ask the question. Finally,she said, "Can
you learn to become Level 5?"36 J/772 Collins
Summary: The Two Sides of Level 5 Leadership
Professional Will Personal Humility
Creates superb results,a clear
catalystin the transition from
good to great.
Demonstratesan unwavering
resolve to do whatever must be
done to produce the bestlong-
term results, no matter how
difficult.
Sets the standardofbuildingan
enduring greatcompany;will
settlefor nothingless.
Looks in the mirror, not out
the window,to apportion
responsibilityfor poorresults,
neverblamingother people,
external factors, or bad luck.
Demonstratesa compelling
modesty,shunning public
adulation; never boastful.
Acts with quiet, calm
determination;reliesprincipally
on inspired standards, not
inspiringcharisma, to motivate.
Channels ambition into the
company,not the self; sets up
successorsfor even greatersuccess
in the nextgeneration.
Looks out the window, not in the
mirror, to apportion credit for the
successof thecompany—toother
people,externalfactors,and good
luck.
My hypothesisis that there aretwo categoriesof people:those who do
nothave the seed ofLevel 5and those who do. The firstcategoryconsists
of peoplewho could never in a millionyears bringthemselvesto subju
gate their egoisticneeds to the greaterambitionof buildingsomething
larger and more lasting than themselves. For these people, work will
always be first and foremostabout what theyget—fame,fortune, adula
tion, power,whatever—notwhatthey build, create, and contribute.Good to Great 37
/*apjj^ V^,* • ^
The second categoryof people—andI suspectthe largergroup—con
sists of those who have the potentialto evolve to Level 5; the capability
resides within them, perhaps buried or ignored, but there nonetheless.
And under the right circumstances—self-reflection,consciouspersonal
development,a mentor,a great teacher,loving parents,a significantlife
experience,a Level 5 boss, or anynumberofother factors—theybeginto
develop.
In lookingat thedata, we noticedthatsome ofthe leadersin ourstudy
had significantlifeexperiencesthat mighthave sparkedor furtheredtheir
maturation. Darwin Smithfully blossomedafterhis experiencewith can
cer. Joe Cullman was profoundlyaffected by his World War II experi
ences, particularlythe last-minutechange of orders that took him off a
doomed ship on which he surely would have died.54 A strong religious
beliefor conversionmightalso nurturedevelopmentofLevel 5traits.Col-
man Mockler, for example, convertedto evangelicalChristianitywhile
getting his MBA at Harvard, and later, accordingto the book Cutting
Edge, became a prime mover in a group of Boston business executives
who metfrequentlyover breakfasttodiscussthe carryoverofreligiousval
ues tocorporatelife.55 Other leadersin ourstudy, however,had no obvi
ous catalyticevent;they justlednormallivesandsomehowendedup atop
the Level 5 hierarchy.
I believe—althoughI cannotprove—thatpotentialLevel 5 leadersare
highly prevalentin our society. The problem is not, in my estimation,a
dearthofpotentialLevel5 leaders.They existall aroundus, ifwe justknow
what to look for. And what is that? Look for situationswhere extraordinary
resultsexistbut whereno individualstepsforth to claimexcesscredit.You
will likelyfind a potentialLevel 5 leader atwork.
Foryourown development,I would love to be able togive youa listof
stepsfor becoming Level 5, but we have no solid research data that would
supporta credible list. Our researchexposedLevel 5 as akey component
insidethe blackbox ofwhat it takes toshifta companyfrom good to great.
Yet inside that black box is yet another black box—namely,the inner
developmentofa personto Level 5. We couldspeculateon whatmightbe38 Jim Collins
insidethat innerblackbox, but itwould mostlybe justthat—speculation.
So, in short,Level 5 is avery satisfyingidea,a powerfulidea, and, to pro
duce the best transitionsfrom good to great, perhaps an essentialidea. A
"Ten-Step Listto Level 5" wouldtrivializethe concept.
My bestadvice,based on the research,is to beginpracticingthe other
good-to-greatdisciplineswe discovered.We found a symbioticrelation
ship betweenLevel 5and the remainingfindings.On the one hand, Level
5 traits enable you to implement the other findings; on the other hand,
practicingthe other findingshelpsyouto become Level 5.Think of it this
way: This chapter isabout whatLevel 5sare; the restof the book describes
whatthey do. Leadingwiththe other disciplinescan help you movein the
right direction. There is no guaranteethat doing so will turn you into a
full-fledgedLevel 5, but itgives you a tangibleplace to begin.
We cannot sayforsure whatpercentageof people have the seed within,
or how many of those can nurture it. Even those of us who discovered
Level 5 on the research team do not know for ourselves whether we will
succeed in fullyevolvingto Level 5.And yet,all of us whoworkedon the
finding have been deeply affected and inspired by the idea. Darwin
Smith, Colman Mockler, Alan Wurtzel, and all the other Level 5s we
learned about have become models for us, something worthy to aspire
toward.Whether or not we make it all the way to Level 5, it is worth the
effort. For like allbasic truths about what is best in humanbeings,when
we catch a glimpse of that truth, we know that our ownlives and all that
we touch will be the better for the effort.LEVEL 5 LEADERSHIP
KEY POINTS
»Eveiy gpo3-tp-greatcompany had Level 5 leadershipduring the
pivotaltransitionyears.
 "Level 5" refers to a five-levelhierarchyof executivecapabilities,
with Level 5 at thetop. Level 5 leadersembodya paradoxicalmix
ofpersonalhumilityand professionalwill. They are ambitious,to
be sure, but ambitious first and foremost for the company, not
themselves.
'Level 5 leadersset up theirsuccessorsfor even greatersuccessin
the next?generation,whereas egocentricLevel 4 leadersoften set
Up their successorsforfailure.
Level 5leadersdisplaya compellingmodesty,areself-effacingand
understated.In contrast,two thirds of thecomparisoncompanies
had leaderswith gargantuanpersonalegos thatcontributedto the
demiseorcontinuedmediocrityofthe company.
\ Level 5 leadersare fanaticallydriven, infectedwith an incurable
needto producesustainedresults.Theyareresolvedto dowhatever
it takes to make the companygreat,no matterhow bigor hard the
decisions.
Level 5leadersdisplayaworkmanlikediligence—moreplowhorse
.train show horse.
1Level 5 leaders look out the window to attribute success to factors
otherthan themselves.Whenthingsgopoorly,however,theylook
in themirrorandblamethemselves,takingfull responsibility.The
compiarfeonCEQs oftendid justthe opposite—theylookedin the
mirror to take credit for success, but out the window to assign
blamefor disappointingresults.
»' One ofthe mostdamagingtrendsin recenthistoryisthe tendency
(especiallyby boardsofdirectors)to selectdazzling,celebritylead
ers and tode-selectpotentialLevel 5 leaders.
I believethat potentialLevel 5leadersexistallaroundus,ifwe just
know whatto look for, and thatmany peoplehave the potentialto
evolve into Level 5.40 Jim Collins
li^^ii^^^^ii
iiiifiiii^^
llilii
SilBlilSlll^HSll JllilPSplilill
lilfpS^lslIPlI
liBM^lii^li
iililiiiSallillllilllllilllili Iplllif8lll^(Sii|iBHSll
ffillltl\& r.t'J
Level 5
Leadership!
C H A P T E R
I Confront the Hedgehog Culture of Technology
Brutal Facts Concept Discipline Accelerators
There are goingto be timeswhen we can't waitforsomebody.
Now,you're either on the bus or offthe bus.
—Ken Kesey,
from The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test
by Tom Wolfe1
'hV Vvhen we began the researchproject,we expectedto find that the
first step in taking a company from good to great would be to set a new
direction, a new visionand strategyfor the company, and then to get peo
ple committed and alignedbehind that newdirection.
We found something quite theopposite.
The executiveswho ignited the transformationsfrom good to great did
not first figure out where to drive the bus and then get people to take it
there. No, theyfirst got the right people on the bus (and the wrong people
offthe bus) and then figured out where todrive it. They said, inessence,
"Look,I don't reallyknowwhere we should take this bus. But I know this
much: If we get the right people on the bus, the right people in the right
seats,and the wrong people offthe bus, then well figure out how to take it
someplace great."42 Jim Collins
The good-to-greatleaders understoodthree simple truths. First, if you
begin with "who," rather than "what," you can more easily adapt to a
changing world. If people join the bus primarilybecause of where it is
going, what happensifyou getten miles down the road and you need to
change direction?You've got a problem. But if people are on the bus
becauseofwho else is on thebus, then it's much easierto changedirec
tion: "Hey, I got on this bus because of who else is on it; if we need to
change directionto be more successful,fine with me." Second, if you
have the right people on the bus, the problem of how to motivate and
manage people largely goes away. The right people don't need to be
tightlymanagedor fired up; they will be self-motivatedbythe inner drive
to produce the best results and to be part of creatingsomethinggreat.
Third, if you have the wrong people, it doesn'tmatter whetheryou dis
cover the right direction;you still won't have a great company. Great
visionwithoutgreatpeopleis irrelevant.
Consider the case of Wells Fargo. Wells Fargo began its fifteen-year
stint of spectacular performance in 1983,but the foundation for the shift
dates backto theearly 1970s,when then-CEODick Cooleybeganbuild
ing one of themost talentedmanagementteams in the industry(the best
team, according to investor Warren Buffett).2 Cooley foresaw that the
banking industrywould eventuallyundergo wrenchingchange, but he
did not pretendto know whatform that changewould take. So insteadof
mapping out a strategy for change, he and chairman Ernie Arbuckle
focusedon "injectingan endlessstreamoftalent"directlyinto theveinsof
the company. They hired outstandingpeople whenever and wherever
theyfound them,oftenwithoutany specificjob in mind. "That'show you
buildthe future,"he said. "IfI'm notsmartenoughtoseethe changesthat
are coming,theywill. And they'llbe flexibleenoughto dealwith them."3
Cooley'sapproachprovedprescient.No one couldpredictall thechanges
that would be wroughtbybankingderegulation.Yet when these changes
came,no bankhandledthosechallengesbetterthan Wells Fargo.Ata time
when itssectorofthe bankingindustryfell 59percentbehind the general
stockmarket,Wells Fargooutperformedthe marketbyoverthree times.4
Carl Reichardt, who became CEO in 1983, attributed the bank's suc
cess largelyto the people around him, most of whom he inherited from
Cooley.5As he listedmembersoftheWells Fargoexecutiveteam thathad
joined the company during the Cooley-Reichardtera, we were stunned.
Nearly every person had gone on tobecome CEO of a major company:Good to Great 43
BillAldingerbecame the CEO of Household Finance, Jack Grundhofer
became CEO of U.S. Bancorp,Frank Newman becameCEO of Bankers
Trust, Richard Rosenbergbecame CEO of Bank of America, Bob Joss
became CEO of WestpacBanking(one of thelargestbanks in Australia)
and later became dean of the Graduate School of Business at Stanford
University—notexactlyyour garden varietyexecutiveteam! Arjay Miller,
an activeWells Fargo board member forseventeenyears, told us that the
Wells Fargo team reminded him of the famed "Whiz Kids" recruited to
Ford Motor Company in the late 1940s (of which Miller was a member,
eventuallybecomingpresidentofFord).6Wells Fargo'sapproachwas sim
ple:You get the bestpeople,youbuild them into the bestmanagersin the
industry, and you accept the fact that some of them will be recruited to
become CEOs of othercompanies.7
Bank of America took a very different approach. While Dick Cooley
systematicallyrecruited the bestpeoplehe could get his hands on, Bankof
America, according to the book Breaking the Bank, followed something
called the "weak generals,stronglieutenants"model.8 If you pickstrong
generals for key positions, their competitors will leave. But if you pick
weak generals—placeholders,rather than highly capable executives—
then the stronglieutenants are more likelyto stickaround.
The weakgenerals model produced a climate very different at Bank of
Americathan the one atWells Fargo.Whereasthe Wells Fargocrewacted
as a strongteam of equalpartners,ferociouslydebating eyeball-to-eyeball
in search of the bestanswers,the Bank ofAmericaweak generalswould
wait for directions from above. Sam Armacost, who inherited the weak
generalsmodel, describedthe management climate: "I came away quite
distressed from my first couple of management meetings. Not only
couldn't I get conflict, I couldn't even get comment. They were all wait
ing to see whichway the wind blew."9
A retired Bank of America executivedescribedsenior managers in the
1970s as "PlasticPeople"who'd been trained to quietlysubmit to the dic
tatesofa domineeringCEO.10Later,afterlosingover$1 billionin themid-
1980s,BankofAmericarecruiteda gangofstronggeneralsto turn the bank
around.Andwhere did itfind those stronggenerals?From rightacrossthe
street at Wells Fargo. In fact, Bank of America recruited so many Wells
Fargo executivesduring its turnaround that people inside began to referto
themselvesas "WellsofAmerica."11At thatpoint,BankofAmericabeganto
climb upwardagain,but it was too littletoo late. From1973 to 1998,while44 Jim Collins
Wells Fargo went from buildupto breakthroughresults,Bank ofAmerica's
cumulativestockreturnsdidn'teven keep pace with thegeneralmarket.
$80
$40
$20
1973
Wells Fargo versus Bank of America
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
January 1,1973 - January 1,1998
Wells Fargo Transition Point
Wells Fargo: $74.47
Bank of America: $15.60
1978 1983 1993
Now, you mightbe thinking,"That's justgood management—theidea
of gettingthe right people aroundyou. What's new about that?" On one
level, we have to agree; it is just plain old-fashionedgood management.
Butwhat standsout with suchdistinctionin the good-to-greatcompanies
are two key pointsthat made them quitedifferent.
"First who" is a very simple idea to grasp, and a very difficult idea to
do—and most don't do it well. It's easy to talk about payingattention toGood to Great 45
people decisions,but how manyexecutiveshave the disciplineof David
Maxwell,who heldoffon developinga strategyuntil he gotthe rightpeo
ple inplace,while the companywas losing$1 millioneverysinglebusiness
day with $56 billion of loansunderwater?When Maxwell became CEO
of Fannie Mae during its darkest days, the board desperatelywanted to
know how he was going to rescue the company. Despite the immense
pressureto act, to dosomethingdramatic,to seizethe wheel and startdri
ving, Maxwellfocusedfirston gettingthe rightpeopleon the Fannie Mae
management team. His first act was to interview all the officers. He sat
them down and said, "Look, this is going to be avery hard challenge.I
want you to think abouthow demandingthis is going to be. Ifyou don't
thinkyou'regoingto like it,that'sfine. Nobody'sgoingto hate you."12
Maxwell made it absolutelyclear that therewould only be seats for A
playerswho were goingtoput forth anA+ effort,andif you weren'tupfor
it, you had better get offthe bus, and get offnow.13 One executivewho
had justuprooted his lifeand career to join Fannie Mae came toMaxwell
and said, "I listenedto you very carefully,and I don't wantto dothis."He
left andwent back towhere he came from.14 In all, fourteenoftwenty-six
executivesleft the company,replacedby some of the best, smartest,and
hardest-workingexecutives in the entire world of finance.15 The same
standardappliedup and down theFannieMae ranks as managersatevery
level increasedthe caliberoftheirteams and put immensepeer pressure
upon each other, creatinghigh turnoverat first, when some people just
didn'tpanout.16"We hada saying,*You can'tfake itat FannieMae,'" said
one executiveteam member. "Eitheryou knew your stuffor you didn't,
and if you didn't, you'd justblowout ofhere."17
Wells Fargo and Fannie Mae both illustratethe idea that"who" ques
tions come before"what"questions—beforevision,beforestrategy,before
tactics, before organizationalstructure,before technology.Dick Cooley
and David Maxwell both exemplifieda classic Level 5 style when they
said,"Idon't knowwherewe shouldtake this company,but I doknowthat
if Istart with the right people,ask them the right questions,and engage
them invigorousdebate,we will find a way to make this companygreat."
NOT A "GENIUS WITH A THOUSAND HELPERS"
In contrastto the good-to-greatcompanies,which built deep and strong
executiveteams, many of the comparisoncompaniesfollowed a "genius46 Jim Collins
with a thousandhelpers"model. In this model, the companyis aplatform
for the talents of an extraordinaryindividual.In these cases, the towering
genius,the primarydrivingforce in thecompany'ssuccess,isa greatasset—
as long as thegeniussticksaround.The geniusesseldombuild greatman
agementteams, for the simple reason that they don't need one, andoften
don't want one. If you're a genius, you don't need a Wells Fargo-caliber
managementteam ofpeople who could run their own shows elsewhere.
No, you justneed anarmy ofgood soldierswho can help implementyour
greatideas.However,when thegeniusleaves,the helpersareoftenlost. Or,
worse,theytryto mimictheir predecessorwith bold,visionarymoves(trying
to actlike a genius,withoutbeinga genius)thatprove unsuccessful.
Eckerd Corporation suffered the liability of a leader who had an
uncannygeniusfor figuringout "what"to do butlittleabilityto assemble
the right "who" on the executiveteam. Jack Eckerd,blessedwith monu
mental personal energy (he campaignedfor governor of Florida while
running his company)and a genetic gift for market insightand shrewd
deal making, acquired his way from two little stores in Wilmington,
Delaware,to a drugstoreempire of over a thousand stores spread across
the southeastern United States. By the late 1970s, Eckerd's revenues
equaledWalgreens',and itlookedlike Eckerdmighttriumph asthe great
companyin the industry.Butthen Jack Eckerdleftto pursuehis passion
for politics,running for senatorand joiningthe Ford administrationin
Washington.Withouthisguidinggenius,Eckerd'scompanybegana long
decline,eventuallybeingacquiredby J. C. Penney.18
The contrast between Jack Eckerd and Cork Walgreen is striking.
Whereas Jack Eckerd had a genius for picking the right stores to buy,
Cork Walgreen had a genius for picking the right people to hire.19
WhereasJack Eckerdhad a giftforseeingwhichstoresshouldgo in what
locations,CorkWalgreenhad agiftfor seeingwhichpeopleshouldgo in
what seats. Whereas Jack Eckerdfailed utterly at the single most impor
tant decisionfacing any executive—theselectionof a successor—Cork
Walgreen developed multiple outstandingcandidates and selected a
superstarsuccessor,who may prove to be even better than Cork him
self.20Whereas Jack Eckerd had no executiveteam, but instead a bunch
of capable helpers assembledto assist the great genius, Cork Walgreen
built the best executiveteam in the industry.Whereas the primaryguid
ance mechanism for Eckerd Corporation'sstrategylay inside Jack Eck
erd's head, the primary guidance mechanism for Walgreens'corporateLevel 5 +
Management Team
(Good-to-Great Companies)
Level 5 Leader
♦
First Who
Get the right people on the bus.
Builda superior executive team.
*
Then What
Once you have the right people
in place, figure out the best path
to greatness.
Good to Great 47
A "Genius with a
Thousand Helpers"
(Comparison Companies)
Level 4 Leader
\
First What
Set a vision for where to drive
the bus. Develop a road map
for driving the bus.
*
Then Who
Enlista crew of highly capable
"helpers" to make the vision
happen.
strategy lay in the group dialogue and shared insights of the talented
executive team.
The "geniuswith a thousandhelpers"model isparticularlyprevalentin
the unsustained comparison companies. The most classic case comes
from a man known as the Sphinx, Henry SingletonofTeledyne.Single
ton grew up on a Texas ranch,with the childhooddream of becominga
greatbusinessmanin themodel ofthe ruggedindividualist.Armed with a
Ph.D. from MIT, he founded Teledyne.21The name Teledyne derives
from Greekand means"forceappliedata distance"—anaptname,as the
centralforce holdingthe far-flungempire togetherwas Henry Singleton
himself.
Throughacquisitions,Singletonbuiltthe companyfrom a small enter
prise to number 293 on the Fortune 500 list in six years.22 Within ten
years, he'd completedmore than 100 acquisitions,eventuallycreatinga
far-flungenterprisewith 130 profitcentersin everythingfrom exotic met
als to insurance.23Amazingly,the whole system worked, with Singleton48 Jim Collins
1967
Teledyne Corporation
A Classic "Genius with a Thousand Helpers''
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market,
January 1,1967-January 1,1996
End of Singleton Era
Decline after
the Genius Departs
1970 1980 1990 1996
himselfactingasthe glue thatconnectedallthe movingpartstogether.At
one point, he said, "I define my job as having the freedom to do what
seems to me to be in thebest interestof thecompanyat any time."24A
1978 Forbes feature story maintained,"Singletonwill win no awards for
humility,but who can avoid standingin awe of his impressiverecord?"
Singletoncontinuedto run thecompanywell into hisseventies,with no
seriousthoughtgiven to succession.Afterall,why worryaboutsuccession
whenthe very pointofthe wholethingisto serveasa platformto leverage
the talentsofyour remarkablegenius?"Ifthereisa singleweaknessin this
otherwisebrilliantpicture/7the articlecontinued, "it isthis: Teledyne is
not so much a system as it is the reflectionof one man's singular disci
pline."25
What a weakness it turned out to be. Once Singletonstepped away
from day-to-day management in the mid-1980s, the far-flung empire
began to crumble.From the endof 1986 until its mergerwith Allegheny
in 1995,Teledyne'scumulativestockreturnsimploded,falling66 percent
behindthegeneralstockmarket.Singletonachievedhischildhooddream
ofbecominga greatbusinessman,buthe failedutterlyat thetask ofbuild
ing a great company.Good to Great 49
IT'S WHO YOU PAY, NOT HOW YOU PAY THEM
We expectedto find that changesin incentivesystems,especiallyexecu
tive incentives,would be highly correlatedwith making the leap from
good to great.With all theattentionpaid to executivecompensation—the
shift to stock optionsand thehuge packagesthat have becomecommon
place—surely,we thought, the amount and structureof compensation
mustplaya key role in goingfrom good togreat. How else doyou getpeo
ple to do the rightthingsthat creategreatresults?
We were deadwrong in our expectations.
We fojund,no systematicpattern linking executivecompensationto
i \k§ pr^efeaolgoicigirorri,goodrtogreatJhe:^viderieepimplydo£s
rv ft|^s#|p^ steuctuFeof executive*mm~
~|fe|sati&n4cis,ajs $4cey lever in taking a cokipanyjrem good to
We spent weeks inputting compensationdata from proxy statements
and performed 112 separate analyses looking for patterns and correla
tions. We examined everythingwe could quantifyfor the top five offi
cers—cash versus stock, long-term versus short-term incentives,salary
versus bonus,and so forth. Some companiesused stock extensively;oth
ers didn't. Some had high salaries;othersdidn't. Some made significant
use of bonus incentives;others didn't. Most importantly,when we ana
lyzed executivecompensationpatternsrelativeto comparisoncompanies,
we found no systematic differences on the use of stock (or not), high
salaries (or not), bonus incentives(or not), or long-termcompensation
(or not). The only significantdifferencewe found was that thegood-to-
great executivesreceivedslightlyless total cash compensationten years
after the transitionthan theircounterpartsat thestill-mediocrecompari
son companies!26
Not thatexecutivecompensationis irrelevant.You have to bebasically
rationaland reasonable(I doubt that ColmanMockler,DavidMaxwell,or
Darwin Smith would have workedfor free), and thegood-to-greatcompa
nies did spend time thinkingaboutthe issue. Butonce you've structured
somethingthat makes basic sense, executivecompensationfalls away as a
distinguishingvariablein movingan organizationfrom good togreat.50 Jim Collins
Why might that be? It issimplya manifestationof the "firstwho" prin
ciple:It's nothow you compensateyourexecutives,it's which executivesyou
have to compensatein the first place. If you have the right executiveson
the bus, theywill do everythingwithin their power to build a great com
pany, not because of what theywill "get" for it, but because theysimply
cannot imagine settling for anything less. Their moral code requires
buildingexcellencefor its own sake, and you'reno morelikelyto change
that witha compensationpackagethan you'relikelyto affectwhether they
breathe. The good-to-greatcompanies understood a simple truth: The
right people will do the right things and deliver the best results they're
capableof, regardlessofthe incentivesystem.
ifSliP^?^ 3
We were not able to look asrigorouslyat nonexecutivecompensation;
such data is notavailablein assystematica formatas proxystatementsfor
top officers. Nonetheless,evidencefrom source documentsand articles
suggeststhatthe same idea appliesatall levelsofan organization.27
A particularlyvivid exampleis Nucor. Nucor built its entiresystem on
the ideathat you can teachfarmershow to make steel,but youcan't teach
a farmer work ethic to people who don't have it in the first place. So,
instead of setting up mills in traditionalsteel towns like Pittsburghand
Gary, it locatedits plants in placeslike Crawfordsville,Indiana;Norfolk,
Nebraska;and Plymouth,Utah—placesfull of realfarmerswho go to bed
early, rise at dawn, and get righttowork withoutfanfare."Gotta milk the
cows"and "Gonnaplowthe northfortybeforenoon"translatedeasilyinto
"Gotta roll some sheet steel" and "Gonna cast forty tons before lunch."
Nucor ejected people who did not share this work ethic, generating as
highas50 percentturnoverin thefirstyearofa plant,followedbyverylow
turnoveras the rightpeoplesettledin for thelong haul.28
To attract and keep the bestworkers,Nucor paid its steelworkersmore
than any other steel company in the world. But it built its pay system
around ahigh-pressureteam-bonusmechanism,withover 50percent ofaGood to Great 51
worker'scompensationtieddirectlyto theproductivityofhis workteamof
twentyto forty people.29Nucorteam memberswould usuallyshow up for
work thirtyminutesearlyto arrangetheirtools and prepareto blastoffthe
startinglinethe instanttheshiftgunfired.30"We have the hardestworking
steel workers in the world," said one Nucor executive. "We hire five, work
themlike ten, andpay themlike eight."31
The Nucor system did not aim to turn lazy people into hard workers,
but to createan environmentwherehardworkingpeoplewould thriveand
lazy workers would either jump or get thrown right off thebus. In one
extremecase,workerschaseda lazy teammateright out of the plant with
an angle iron.32
Nucor illustratesa key point. In determining "the right people," the
good-to-greatcompanies placed greater weight on character attributes
than on specific educational background, practical skills, specialized
knowledge,or work experience. Not that specificknowledgeor skills are
unimportant, but they viewed these traits as more teachable (or at least
learnable), whereas they believed dimensions like character, work ethic,
basic intelligence, dedication to fulfillingcommitments, and values are
more ingrained.As Dave Nassefof PitneyBowes put it:
I used to be in the Marines,and the Marinesget a lot of credit for build
ing people's values. But that's not the way it really works. The Marine
Corps recruits people who share the corps'values, then providesthem
with the training required toaccomplishthe organization'smission.We
look at it the same wayat PitneyBowes.We have more people who want
to do the right thing than mostcompanies.We don't justlook at experi
ence. We want toknow: Who are they? Why are they?We find out who
they are by asking them why they made decisions in their life. The
answersto thesequestionsgive us insightintotheircore values.33
One good-to-great executive said that his best hiring decisions often
came from people with no industry or business experience. In one case,52 Jim Collins
he hired amanagerwho'd been capturedtwice duringthe SecondWorld
War and escapedboth times. "I thought thatanyone who could do that
shouldn't have trouble with business."34
RIGOROUS, NOT RUTHLESS
The good-to-greatcompaniesprobablysoundlike tough placesto work—
and they are. Ifyou don'thave what it takes,you probablywon'tlastlong.
But they're not ruthless cultures,they're rigorous cultures.And the dis
tinction is crucial.
To be ruthlessmeans hackingand cutting,especiallyin difficulttimes,
orwantonlyfiringpeoplewithoutanythoughtfulconsideration.To be rig
orousmeansconsistentlyapplyingexactingstandardsat all timesand at all
levels, especiallyin upper management.To be rigorous, not ruthless,
means that the best people need not worry about their positionsand can
concentrate fullyon their work.
In 1986,Wells Fargo acquiredCrockerBankand planned to shed gobs
of excesscost in theconsolidation.There's nothing unusual aboutthat—
everybank merger in the era ofderegulationaimed to cut excess cost out
of a bloated and protectedindustry.However,what was unusual about the
Wells-Crockerconsolidationis theway Wells integratedmanagement or,
to be more accurate,the way it didn't even try tointegratemost Crocker
managementinto the Wellsculture.
The WellsFargoteam concludedrightup frontthat the vastmajorityof
Crocker managerswouldbe the wrongpeopleon the bus. Crocker people
had long been steeped in the traditionsand perks of old-stylebanker cul
ture, complete with a marbled executivedining room with its own chef
and $500,000worth of china.35Quite a contrastto the spartanculture at
WellsFargo,wheremanagementate food preparedbya college dormitory
food service.36Wells Fargo made it clearto theCrockermanagers:"Look,
this is not a mergerofequals;it'san acquisition;we bought your branches
and yourcustomers;we didn't acquireyou/7 Wells Fargoterminated most
ofthe Crocker management team—1,600Crocker managersgone on day
one—includingnearlyall the topexecutives.37
A critic mightsay, "That's justthe Wells people protecting their own."
But consider the followingfact: Wells Fargo also sent some of its own
managers packing in cases where the Crocker managers were judged as
better qualified. When it came to management, the Wells Fargo stan-Good to Great 53
dards wereferociousand consistent.Like aprofessionalsportsteam, only
the best made the annual cut, regardlessof position or tenure. Summed
up one Wells Fargo executive:"The only way to deliver to the people
who are achievingis to not burden them with the people who are not
achieving."38
On the surface,this looks ruthless.But the evidence suggeststhat the
average Crocker manager was just not the same caliber as the average
Wells manager and would have failed in the Wells Fargo performance
culture. If they weren'tgoingto make it on the bus in the long term, why
let them suffer in the short term? One senior Wells Fargo executivetold
us: "We all agreed this was an acquisition,not a merger, and there's no
sensebeatingaround the bush, not beingstraightforwardwith people.We
decided it would be best to simply do it on day one. We planned our
effortsso that we couldsay, right up front, 'Sorry,we don't see a role for
you,' or Yes, we do see a role; you have a job,so stop worryingabout it.'
We were not going to subject our culture to a death by a thousand
cuts.' "39
To let people languish in uncertaintyfor months oryears, stealing pre
cioustime in their lives that theycould use tomove on to somethingelse,
when in the end they aren't goingto makeitanyway—thatwouldbe ruth
less. To deal with it right up front and let people get on with theirlives—
that is rigorous.
Not that the Crocker acquisition is easy to swallow. It's never pleasant
to seethousandsof peoplelose their jobs,but the era ofbankderegulation
saw hundreds ofthousandsof lostjobs. Given that, it'sinterestingto note
two points. First, Wells Fargo did fewer big layoffs than its comparison
company, Bank of America.40 Second, upper management, including
some seniorWells Fargo upper management,sufferedmore on a percent
age basis than lower-levelworkersin theconsolidation.41Rigor in a good-
to-greatcompany applies first at the top, focused on those who hold the
largestburden of responsibility.
To be rigorousin peopledecisionsmeans firstbecoming rigorousabout
top managementpeople decisions. Indeed, I fear that people might use
"first who rigor" as an excuse for mindlessly chopping out people to
improveperformance."It'shard to do, butwe'vegot to berigorous,"I can
hear them say. And I cringe. For not onlywill a lot ofhardworking,good
people get hurt in theprocess,but the evidencesuggeststhat such tactics
are contrary to producing sustained greatresults.The good-to-greatcom
panies rarelyused head-count loppingas a tactic and almost never used it54 Jim Collins
asa primarystrategy.Even in theWells Fargocase,the companyused lay
offs halfas much asBank ofAmericaduringthe transitionera.
In contrast, we found layoffs used five times more frequently in the
comparisoncompaniesthan in the good-to-greatcompanies.Some of the
comparison companies had an almost chronic addiction to layoffs and
restructurings.42
It would be amistake—atragic mistake,indeed—tothink that the way
you ignite atransitionfrom good to great is bywantonlyswingingthe ax
on vast numbers ofhardworkingpeople. Endlessrestructuringand mind
less hackingwere neverpart ofthe good-to-greatmodel.
How to Be Rigorous
We'veextractedthree practicaldisciplinesfrom the researchfor being rig
orous rather than ruthless.
PracticalDiscipline#1:When in doubt, don't hire—keeplooking.
One of the immutable laws of management physics is "Packard'sLaw."
(So called because wefirst learned it in a previousresearch project from
David Packard,cofounderof the Hewlett-PackardCompany.) It goes like
this: No companycan grow revenuesconsistentlyfasterthan its abilityto
get enough ofthe rightpeopleto implementthatgrowthand still become
a great company. If your growth rate in revenues consistentlyoutpaces
yourgrowth rate in people,yousimplywill not—indeedcannot—builda
great company.Good to Great 55
The management team at Circuit City instinctively understood
Packard'sLaw. Drivingaround Santa Barbara the day after Christmasa
few years ago, I noticedsomethingdifferentaboutthe CircuitCity store.
Otherstoreshad signsand bannersreachingouttocustomers:"Alwaysthe
Best Prices" or "Great After-HolidayDeals" or "Best After-Christmas
Selection,"and so forth. But not Circuit City. It had a banner that read:
"AlwaysLookingfor GreatPeople."
The sign remindedme ofourinterviewwith WalterBruckart,vice pres
ident during the good-to-greatyears. When asked to name the top five
factors that led to the transitionfrom mediocrityto excellence,Bruckart
said, "One would be people.Two would be people.Three would be peo
ple. Four would be people.And five would be people.Ahuge partofour
transitioncan be attributedto ourdisciplinein pickingthe rightpeople."
Bruckart then recalled a conversationwith CEO Alan Wurtzel during a
growth spurt at Circuit City: " 'Alan, I'm really wearing down trying to
find the exact right person to fill this position or that position.At what
point do I compromise?'Withouthesitation,Alan said, You don't com
promise. We find another way to get through until we find the right
people.'"43
One ofthe key contrastsbetweenAlan Wurtzelat Circuit City and Sid
ney Cooper at Silo is thatWurtzelspent the bulk of his time in theearly
years focused on getting the right people on the bus, whereas Cooper
spent80 percentofhis timefocusingonthe rightstorestobuy.44Wurtzel's
firstgoal was to buildthebest, mostprofessionalmanagementteamin the
industry;Cooper'sfirst goal was simplyto grow as fast as possible.Circuit
City put tremendous emphasis on getting the right people all up and
down the line, from deliverydrivers to vice presidents;Silo developeda
reputationfornot beingableto do thebasics,like makinghome deliveries
without damaging the products.45 According to Circuit City's Dan
Rexinger,"We made the best home deliverydrivers in the industry.We
told them, Tou are the last contact the customer has with Circuit City.
Weare goingtosupplyyou with uniforms.Wewill requirethat you shave,
that you don't have B.O. You're going to be professionalpeople.' The
change in the way we handled customerswhen making a deliverywas
absolutelyincredible.We wouldget thank-younotes backon how courte
ous the driverswere."46Fiveyears intoWurtzel'stenure, Circuit City and
Silo had essentiallythe same businessstrategy(the same answers to the
"what"questions),yet Circuit Citytook offlike a rocket,beating the gen
eral stockmarket 18.5 to 1 in thefifteenyearsafteritstransition,while Silo56 Jim Collins
bumpedalonguntil itwas finallyacquiredby a foreigncompany.47Same
strategy,differentpeople,differentresults.
PracticalDiscipline#2: When you know you need to make a people
change,act.
The momentyou feel the need totightlymanagesomeone,you've made
a hiring mistake. The best people don't need to be managed. Guided,
taught, led—yes. But not tightly managed. We've all experienced or
observedthe followingscenario.We have a wrong personon the busand
we know it. Yet we wait, we delay, we try alternatives,we give a third and
fourth chance,we hope thatthe situationwill improve,we investtime in
tryingto properlymanage the person,we build littlesystemsto compen
sate for his shortcomings,andso forth. Butthe situationdoesn'timprove.
When we go home, we find ourenergydivertedby thinking(or talkingto
our spouses)aboutthat person.Worse, all thetime and energywe spend
on that one person siphons energy away from developingand working
with all theright people.We continueto stumblealong until the person
leaveson hisown (to ourgreatsenseofrelief)orwe finallyact (alsoto our
great sense of relief). Meanwhile, our best people wonder, "What took
you solong?"
Lettingthe wrong peoplehang around is unfairto allthe rightpeople,
as they inevitablyfind themselvescompensatingfor the inadequaciesof
the wrong people. Worse, it can drive away the best people. Strongper
formers are intrinsicallymotivatedby performance,and when they see
their efforts impeded by carryingextra weight, they eventuallybecome
frustrated.
Waiting too long before acting is equally unfair to the people who
need to get offthebus. Forevery minute you allow a personto continue
holding a seat when youknow that person will not make it in the end,
you're stealinga portion of his life, time that he could spend finding a
better place where he could flourish. Indeed, if we're honest with our
selves, the reason we wait too longoften has less to do with concern for
that person and more to do with our own convenience.He's doing an
okay job and it would be a huge hassle to replace him, so we avoid the
issue. Or we find the wholeprocessof dealingwith the issue to be stress
ful and distasteful. So, to save ourselves stress and discomfort, we wait.
And wait. And wait. Meanwhile,all thebest people are still wondering,
"Whenaretheygoingtodo somethingaboutthis? How longis this going
to go on?"Good to Great 57
Using data fromMoody'sCompanyInformationReports,we were able
to examine the pattern of turnover in the top management levels. We
found nodifferencein the amountof"churn" (turnoverwithin a period of
time) between the good-to-greatand the comparisoncompanies. But we
did finddifferencesin the patternofchurn.48
$pe gdojKo-greatcompaniesshowedthe followingbipolarpatternat
=the fop managementlevel: Peopleeither stayed on the bus for along
vitirne or got off the bus in a hurry. In other Words, the good-to-great
• ^eoniparSlesdid notehurnmore,fheychurneddefer. ; <\
The good-to-greatleadersdid notpursuean expedient"trya lot of peo
ple and keep who works" model of management. Instead, they adopted
the followingapproach:"Let's take the time to make rigorousA+ selec
tions rightup front. If we get itright, we'll do everythingwe can to tryto
keep them on boardfora longtime. Ifwe make a mistake,then we'llcon
frontthatfact sothat we cangeton with ourworkand theycan getonwith
their lives."
The good-to-greatleaders, however, would not rush to judgment.
Often, they investedsubstantialeffort in determiningwhether they had
someone in the wrong seat before concludingthat they had the wrong
person on the bus entirely. When Colman Mockler became CEO of
Gillette,he didn'tgoon a rampage,wantonlythrowingpeopleout thewin
dows ofa movingbus. Instead,he spentfully 55 percentofhis timeduring
his first two years in office jiggeringaround with the managementteam,
changing or moving thirty-eightof the top fifty people. Said Mockler,
"Every minute devoted to puttingthe proper person in the proper slot is
worthweeksoftimelater."49Similarly,AlanWurtzelofCircuitCitysentus
a letterafterreadingan earlydraftofthis chapter,whereinhe commented:
Your point about "gettingthe right people on the bus" as compared to
othercompaniesisdeadon.There isone corollarythat isalso important.
I spent a lot of time thinking andtalkingabout who sits where on the
bus. I called it "puttingsquare pegs in square holes and round pegs in
round holes."... Insteadof firing honest and able people who are not
performingwell, it is important to tryto movethem once or even two or
three times to otherpositionswhere theymight blossom.58 Jim Collins
But how do you know when you know? Two key questions can help.
First,if it werea hiring decision(ratherthan a "should this person get off
the bus?" decision),would you hire the personagain? Second, if the per
son came to tell you that he or she isleavingto pursue an excitingnew
opportunity,wouldyoufeel terriblydisappointedor secretiyrelieved?
PracticalDiscipline#3:Putyour bestpeopleonyour biggestopportunities,not
yourbiggestproblems.
In the early 1960s,R.J. Reynoldsand PhilipMorrisderivedthe vast major
ityof their revenuesfrom the domesticarena. R.J. Reynolds'approachto
international business was, "If somebodyout there in the world wants a
Camel, let them call us."50 Joe Cullman at PhilipMorris had a different
view. He identifiedinternationalmarketsasthe singlebestopportunityfor
long-termgrowth, despite the fact that the companyderivedless than 1
percent of itsrevenuesfrom overseas.
Cullman puzzled overthe best "strategy"for developinginternational
operationsand eventuallycame up with a brilliant answer: It was not a
"what"answer,but a "who."He pulled his number oneexecutive,George
Weissman,offthe primarydomesticbusiness,and put him in charge of
international. At the time,international amounted to almost nothing—a
tiny exportdepartment,a strugglinginvestmentin Venezuela,another in
Australia, and a tiny operation in Canada. "When Joe put George in
chargeof international,a lot ofpeoplewonderedwhat George had done
wrong,"quippedoneof Weissman'scolleagues.51"I didn'tknow whether
I was beingthrown sideways,downstairsor out thewindow,"said Weiss
man. "Here I was running 99% of the companyand the next day I'd be
running 1% or less."52
Yet, asForbesmagazineobservedtwentyyearslater,Cullman'sdecision
to move Weissman to the smallest part of the business was a stroke of
genius. Urbane and sophisticated,Weissman was the perfect person to
develop markets like Europe, and he built internationalinto the largest
and fastest-growingpart of the company.In fact, under Weissman'sstew-Good to Great 59
ardship, Marlboro became the best-sellingcigarette in the world three
years before it becamenumberonein the UnitedStates.53
The RJR versus Philip Morris case illustratesa common pattern. The
good-to-greatcompaniesmadea habitofputtingtheir bestpeople on their
best opportunities, not their biggestproblems.The comparison compa
nies had a penchant for doing just theopposite,failing to grasp the fact
that managingyour problemscan onlymake you good, whereasbuilding
your opportunities is the onlyway to become great.
th^se r?tt!e^efete.0f change. Ifyou creates place whereIhe best
^han&esjrtdirection. . „
For instance, when Kimberly-Clarksold the mills, Darwin Smith made
it clear: The company might be getting rid of the paper business,but it
wouldkeep itsbestpeople."Many of our people had come up through the
paper business.Then, all of a sudden, the crownjewelsare being sold off
and they're asking, 'What is myfuture?'" explainedDick Auchter. "And
Darwin would say, We need all the talented managers we can get. We
keepthem.' "54 Despitethe fact that theyhad littleor no consumerexpe
rience, Smith moved all the best paper people to the consumerbusiness.
We interviewedDick Appert,a seniorexecutivewho spent the majority
of his career in the papermakingdivision at Kimberly-Clark,the same
divisionsoldoffto create fundsforthe company'sbig moveinto consumer
products. He talked with pride and excitement about the transformation
of Kimberly-Clark,how it had the guts to sell the paper mills, how it had
the foresightto exit the paper businessand throw the proceeds into the
consumer business, and how it had taken on Procter & Gamble. "I never
had any argument with our decision to dissolvethe paper division of the
company," he said. "We did get rid of the paper mills at that time, and I
was in absoluteagreement with that."55 Stop and think about that for a
moment. The right people want to be part of building something great,
and Dick Appertsaw that Kimberly-Clarkcould become great by selling
the part of the company where he had spent most of hisworkinglife.
The Philip Morris and Kimberly-Clark cases illustrate a final point60 Jim Collins
about "the right people."We noticed a Level 5 atmosphereat the top
executivelevel of everygood-to-greatcompany,especiallyduringthe key
transition years. Not that every executive on the team became a fully
evolved Level 5 leader to thesame degree as Darwin Smith or Colman
Mockler,but each corememberofthe team transformedpersonalambi
tion intoambitionforthe company.Thissuggeststhat the teammembers
had Level 5 potential—orat least they were capable of operatingin a
manner consistentwith theLevel 5 leadershipstyle.
You might be wondering,"What's the difference between a Level 5
executiveteam member and justbeing a good soldier?"A Level 5 execu
tive team memberdoes not blindlyacquiesceto authorityand is astrong
leader in her own right, sodriven and talented that she builds her arena
into one of the very best in the world. Yet each team member must also
have the abilityto meld thatstrengthintodoingwhateverit takes to make
the companygreat.
Anarticleon PhilipMorrissaid ofthe Cullman era, "Theseguys never
agreed on anything and they would argue about everything,and they
would kill each other andinvolve everyone,high and low, talented peo
ple. But when they had tomake a decision,the decisionwould emerge.
This made Philip Morris."56No matter how much they argued, said a
Philip Morrisexecutive,"theywere alwaysin search of the bestanswer.In
the end, everybodystood behind the decision.All of the debates were for
the commongood ofthe company,not yourowninterests."57
FIRST WHO, GREAT COMPANIES,
AN D A GREAT LI FE
Whenever I teach the good-to-greatfindings, someone almost always
raises the issue of the personalcost in making a transitionfrom good toGood to Great 61
great.In otherwords,isit possibletobuilda greatcompanyand also build
a greatlife?
Yes.
The secretto doingso liesrightin this chapter.
I spenta few shortdays with a seniorGilletteexecutiveand hiswife at
an executiveconferencein HongKong. Duringthe courseof our conver
sations, I asked them if they thought Colman Mockler, the CEO most
responsiblefor Gillette's transitionfrom good to great, had a great life.
Colman's liferevolvedaround threegreatloves, they told me: hisfamily,
Harvard,and Gillette.Even duringthe darkestand most intensetimes of
the takeovercrisesof the 1980sand despitethe increasinglyglobalnature
of Gillette's business, Mockler maintained remarkable balance in his life.
He did notsignificantlyreducethe amountoftime he spentwith hisfam
ily, rarely workingeveningsor weekends.He maintainedhis disciplined
worship practices.He continuedhis active work on the governingboard
ofHarvardCollege.58
When I asked how Mockler accomplished all of this, the executive
said, "Oh, it really wasn't that hard for him. He was so good at assem
bling the right peoplearound him, and puttingthe right people in the
right slots, that he just didn't need to be there all hours of the day and
night. That was Colman's whole secret to success and balance." The
executive went on to explain that hewas just as likely to meet Mockler
in the hardware store as at the office. "He really enjoyed puttering
around the house, fixing things up. He always seemed to find time to
relaxthat way." Then the executive'swife added, "When Colman died
and we all went to the funeral, I looked around and realized how much
love was in the room. This was a man who spent nearly all his waking
hours with people who loved him, who loved what they were doing,
and who loved one another—at work, at home, in his charitable work,
wherever."
And the statementranga bell forme, as therewas somethingabout the
good-tb-greatexecutive teams that I couldn't quite describe, but that
clearly set them apart. In wrapping up our interviewwith GeorgeWeiss
man of Philip Morris, I commented, "When you talk about your time at
the company, it's as if you aredescribinga love affair."He chuckled and
said, "Yes. Other than my marriage, it was the passionatelove affair of
my life. I don't think many people would understand what I'm talking
about, but I suspect my colleagues would." Weissman and many of his
executive colleagues keptofficesat Philip Morris, coming in on a regu-62 Jim Collins
lar basis, long after retirement.A corridorat the Philip Morris world
headquarters is called "the hall of thewizardsof was."59It's the corridor
where Weissman, Cullman, Maxwell, and others continue to come into
the office, in large part because they simply enjoy spending time
together. Similarly,DickAppertof Kimberly-Clarksaid in hisinterview,
"I neverhad anyonein Kimberly-Clarkin all myforty-oneyears say any
thing unkind to me. I thank God the day Iwas hired because I've been
associatedwith wonderful people. Good, good people who respected
and admired one another."60
Members of the good-to-greatteams tended to become and remain
friends for life. In many cases, they are still in close contact with each
otheryears or decadesafterworkingtogether.It was strikingto hear them
talk aboutthe transitionera, for no matterhow dark the days or how big
the tasks, these peoplehad fun! They enjoyedeach other'scompanyand
actuallylooked forward to meetings.A number of theexecutivescharac
terized their years on the good-to-greatteams as the high point of their
lives.Theirexperienceswentbeyondjustmutualrespect(whichtheycer
tainlyhad),to lastingcomradeship.
Adherenceto the ideaof"firstwho" mightbe the closestlinkbetweena
great company and a greatlife.For no matter what we achieve, ifwe don't
spend the vast majorityof our timewith people we love and respect,we
cannot possiblyhave a greatlife. But if wespend thevast majorityof our
timewithpeoplewe loveandrespect—peoplewe reallyenjoybeingon the
buswith and who will neverdisappointus—thenwewill almostcertainly
have a great life, no matter where the bus goes. The people we inter
viewed from the good-to-greatcompanies clearly loved what they did,
largelybecausethey lovedwhotheydid it with.FIRST WHO . . . THEN WHAT
KEY POINTS
The good-to-greatleadersbeganthe transformationbyfirst getting
therightpeopleonthe bus (and the wrongpeopleoffthebus) and
then figuredout where todrive it
The key pointofthis chapterisnot justthe idea ofgettingthe right
people on the team. The key point is that "who'' questionscome
before "what" decisions—beforevision, before strategy, before
organizationstructure,before tactics. First who, then what—as a
rigorousdiscipline,consistentlyapplied.
The comparisoncompaniesfrequentlyfollowedthe "geniuswith a
thousandhelpers"model—a genius leaderwho sets a vision and
then enlistsa crewof highlycapable"helpers"to make the vision
happen.This modelfails when the geniusdeparts.
The good-to-greatleaders were rigorous, not ruthless, in people
decisions.They did not rely on layoffs and restructuringas a pri
marystrategyfor improvingperformance.The comparisoncompa
nies used layoffsto a much greaterextent.
We uncoveredthree practicaldisciplinesforbeing rigorousin peo
ple decisions:
1. When in doubt, don't hire—keeplooking. (Corollary:A com
panyshouldlimitits growthbasedon its abilityto attractenough
ofthe right people.)
2. When you knowyou needto makea peoplechange,act (Corol
lary: Firstbe sure youdon't simplyhave someonein the wrong
seat.)
3. Put your best people on your biggest opportunities, not your
biggestproblems.(Corollary:Ifyou sell offyourproblems,don't
sell offyour best people.)
Good-to-greatmanagementteams consist of people who debate
vigorouslyin searchofthe bestanswers,yetwho unifybehinddeci
sions,regardlessofparochialinterests.64 Jim Collins
UNEXPECTED.FINDINGS
We found nosystematicpatternlinkingexecutivecompensationto
theshiftfrom goodtogreatThe purposeofcompensationisnotto
"motivate"the right beliaviorsfrom the wrong people,butto get
andkeepthe rightpeoplein thefirstplace.
The old ad^ge "People are your most importantasset* is.wrong.
Peoplearernotyour mostimportantassetThe rightpeopleare*
Whethersomeoneis the"rightperson"has moreto do with char
acter traits and inflate capabilitiesthan with specificknowledge,
background,orskills. ,C HA P T E R
Level 5 First Who. .
Leadership Then What
Hedgehog Culture of Technology
Concept Discipline Accelerators
There is noworse mistakein publicleadershipthan to hold
out false hopessoonto be sweptaway.
—Winston S. Churchill,
The Hinge ofFate1
n the early 1950s, the GreatAtlanticand PacificTea Company,com
monly known as A&P, stood as the largest retailingorganizationin the
world and one of the largest corporationsin the United States, at one
point ranking behind only General Motors in annual sales.2 Kroger, in
contrast,stoodasan unspectaculargrocerychain, less than halfthe sizeof
A&P, with performancethat barelykeptpace with the generalmarket.
Then in the 1960s,A&P began to falter while Kroger began to lay the
foundationsfor a transitioninto a great company. From 1959 to 1973,
both companieslagged behindthe market,with Kroger pullingjust a bit
ahead of A&P. After that, the two companiescompletelydiverged,and
over the next twenty-fiveyears, Kroger generatedcumulativereturns ten
times the marketand eightytimesbetter than A&P.
Howdid such adramaticreversaloffortuneshappen?Andhowcould a
company as great as A&P become soawful?66 Jim Collins
1959
Kroger, A&P, and the Market
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1959-1973
1966
Notes:
1. Kroger transition point occurred in 1973.
2. Chart shows value of $1 invested on January 1,1959.
3. Cumulative returns, dividends reinvested, to January 1,1973.
$200
$150
$100
1973
Kroger, A&P, and the Market
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1973-1998
1985
Notes:
1. Kroger transition point occurred in 1973.
2. Chart shows value of $1 invested on January 1,1973.
3. Cumulative returns, dividends reinvested, to January 1,1998.
General Market:
$3.42
Kroger $1.26
A&P: $0.64
1973
Kroger: $198.47Good to Great 67
A&P had a perfect model for the first half of the twentieth century,
when two world wars and a depressionimposed frugality upon Ameri
cans: cheap, plentifulgroceriessold in utilitarianstores.But in the afflu
ent second half of the twentieth century, Americans changed. They
wanted nicer stores, bigger stores, more choices in stores. They wanted
fresh-bakedbread, flowers, health foods, cold medicines,fresh produce,
forty-five choices of cereal, and ten types of milk. They wanted offbeat
items, like five different types of expensivesprouts and various concoc
tionsofprotein powderand Chinese healingherbs. Oh, and they wanted
to be able to do theirbankingand get their annual flushots while shop
ping. In short,they no longerwantedgrocerystores.They wanted Super
stores, with a big block "S" on the chest—offeringalmost everything
under one roof, with lots of parking, cheap prices, clean floors, and a
gazillion checkout lines.
Now, right off the bat, you might be thinking: "Okay, so the story of
A&P is one of anaging companythat had astrategythat was rightfor the
times,but thetimeschangedand theworldpasseditbyas younger,better-
attuned companiesgave customersmore of what theywanted.What's so
interestingabout that?"
Here's what's interesting:Both Kroger and A&P were old companies
(Krogerat 82 years,A&P at 111 years) headinginto the 1970s;both com
panieshad nearlyall theirassetsinvestedin traditionalgrocerystores;both
companieshad strongholdsoutsidethe majorgrowth areas of the United
States;and both companieshadknowledgeofhow the worldaroundthem
was changing.Yet one of thesetwo companiesconfrontedthe brutal facts
of realityhead-onand completelychangedits entire system in response;
the other stuck its head in the sand.
In 1958, Forbes magazinedescribedA&P as "the Hermit Kingdom,"
run asan absolutemonarchybyan agingprince.3Ralph Burger,the suc
cessorto theHartfordbrotherswho had builttheA&P dynasty,soughtto
preservetwo things above all else: cash dividendsfor the family founda
tion and the past glory of the Hartfordbrothers.Accordingto one A&P
director, Burger"considered himselfthe reincarnation of old John Hart
ford, even to the point of wearing a flower in his lapel every day from
Hartford'sgreenhouse.He tried to carryout, againstall opposition,what
he thought Mr. John [Hartford] would have liked."4Burger instilleda
"whatwould Mr. Hartforddo?" approachto decisions,livingbythe motto
"You can't argue with a hundred years of success."5 Indeed, through68 Jim Collins
Burger,Mr. Hartfordcontinued to be the dominant force on the board
for nearlytwentyyears. Nevermind the factthat hewas alreadydead.6
As the brutal facts about the mismatchbetween its past model and the
changingworld began to pile up,A&P mounted an increasinglyspirited
defenseagainstthose facts. In oneseriesofevents,the companyopened a
new store called The Golden Key, a separate brand wherein it could
experiment with new methods and models to learn what customers
wanted.7Itsold noA&P-brandedproducts,itgave the storemanagermore
freedom,it experimentedwith innovativenew departments,and it began
to evolve toward the modern superstore.Customers really liked it. Here,
rightunder their noses,theybeganto discoverthe answerto thequestions
ofwhy theywere losingmarketshareand whatthey could do about it.
What did A&Pexecutivesdo withThe Golden Key?
Theydidn't like the answersthatit gave, sothey closedit.8
A&P then began a pattern of lurching from one strategyto another,
always lookingfor a single-strokesolutionto its problems.It held pep ral
lies,launched programs,grabbedfads, fired CEOs, hired CEOs, andfired
them yetagain.It launchedwhatone industryobservercalleda "scorched
earth policy," a radical price-cuttingstrategyto build market share, but
never dealt with the basic fact that customerswanted not lower prices, but
differentstores.9The price cuttingled to costcutting, which led to even
drabber stores and poorer service,which in turn drove customers away,
further driving down margins, resultingin even dirtier stores and worse
service. "After a while the crud kept mounting," said one former A&P
manager."We not only haddirt,we haddirtydirt."10
Meanwhile,overat Kroger,a completelydifferentpatternarose. Kroger
also conductedexperimentsin the 1960sto test the superstoreconcept.11
By 1970, the Kroger executiveteam came to aninescapableconclusion:
The old-modelgrocerystore (which accountedfor nearly 100 percent of
Kroger's business)was going to become extinct. Unlike A&P, however,
Krogerconfrontedthis brutaltruth and actedon it.
The rise of Kroger is remarkablysimple and straightforward,almost
maddeninglyso. Duringtheirinterviews,Lyle Everinghamandhis prede
cessorJim Herring(CEOs duringthe pivotaltransitionyears) were polite
and helpful, but a bit exasperatedby our questions. To them, it just
seemed so clear. When we asked Everinghamto allocate one hundred
points across the top five factors in the transition,he said: "I find your
question a bit perplexing.Basically,we did extensive research, and the
data came back loud and clear: The supercombination stores were theGood to Great 69
way ofthe future. Wealso learnedthat youhad to be number one or num
ber two in eachmarket,or you had toexit.* Sure, there was some skepti
cism at first. But oncewe lookedat thefacts, therewas reallyno question
about what we had to do. So we just didit."12
Krogerdecidedto eliminate,change,or replaceevery singlestore and
depart every region that did notfit the new realities.The whole system
would be turned inside out, store by store, block by block, city by city,
state bystate. By the early 1990s, Kroger had rebuiltits entire system on
thenew modelandwas well onthe way tobecomingthenumberonegro
cery chain in America, a position it would attain in 1999.13 Meanwhile,
A&P still had over half its stores in the old 1950s size and had dwindled to
a sad remnant ofaonce-greatAmericaninstitution.14
FACTS ARE BETTER THAN DREAMS
One of the dominant themes from our research is that breakthrough
resultscome about by a series ofgood decisions,diligentlyexecutedand
accumulatedone on top ofanother.Of course,the good-to-greatcompa
nies did not have a perfecttrack record. But on the whole, they made
many more good decisions than bad ones, and they made many more
good decisionsthanthe comparisoncompanies.Even more important,on
the reallybigchoices,such as Kroger'sdecisionto throw all its resources
into the task ofconvertingits entiresystemtothe superstoreconcept,they
wereremarkablyon target.
This, ofcourse,begs a question.Are we merelystudyinga setof com
panies that just happenedby luck to stumble into the right set ofdeci
sions? Or was there something distinctive about their process that
dramaticallyincreasedthe likelihoodofbeing right?The answer,it turns
out, is thatthere was somethingquite distinctiveabouttheir process.
The good-to-greatcompaniesdisplayedtwo distinctiveforms of disci
plinedthought.The first, andthe topicofthis chapter,is thatthey infused
the entireprocesswith the brutalfacts ofreality. (Thesecond,which we
*Keepin mind, this was the early1970s,a full decade beforethe "number one, num
bertwo, or exit" idea became mainstream.Kroger, like all good-to-greatcompanies,
developedits ideas by payingattentiontothe data rightinfront ofit,not by following
trendsandfads setby others. Interestingly,over halfthegood-to-greatcompanieshad
some version of the "number one, number two" concept in place years before it
became a managementfad.70 Jim Collins
will discussin thenextchapter,isthat theydevelopeda simple,yetdeeply
insightful,frame of referencefor all decisions.)When, as in the Kroger
case,you startwith an honestanddiligenteffortto determinethe truthof
the situation,the rightdecisionsoftenbecomeself-evident.Notalways,of
course, but often. And even if alldecisionsdo not become self-evident,
onethingis certain:You absolutelycannotmake aseriesofgood decisions
without first confrontingthe brutal facts. The good-to-greatcompanies
operatedin accordancewith this principle,and the comparisoncompa
niesgenerallydid not.
ConsiderPitneyBowes versusAddressograph.It would be hard tofind
two companiesin more similarpositionsat aspecificmomentin history
thatthen divergedsodramatically.Until 1973,theyhadsimilarrevenues,
profits, numbers of employees,and stock charts. Both companiesheld
near-monopolymarketpositionswith virtuallythe same customerbase—
PitneyBowes in postagemetersand Addressographin address-duplicating
machines—andboth faced the imminent realityof losingtheir monopo
lies.15 By 2000, however,PitneyBowes had growntoover 30,000employ
ees and revenuesin excess of $4billion,compared to thesorry remnants
ofAddressograph,whichhad less than $100 millionand only670 employ
ees.16 For the shareholder,Pitney Bowes outperformedAddressograph
3,581 to 1(yes, three thousandfive hundredand eighty-onetimesbetter).
In 1976, a charismaticvisionaryleadernamed Roy Ash became CEO
ofAddressograph.Aself-described"conglomerates,"Ash had previously
built Litton by stacking acquisitionstogether that had since faltered.
Accordingto Fortune, he sought to use Addressographas a platformto
reestablishhis leadershipprowessin theeyes ofthe world.17
Ash set forth a vision to dominate the likes of IBM, Xerox, and Kodak in
the emergingfield ofofficeautomation—abold plan for a companythat
had previously only dominated the envelope-address-duplicationbusi
ness.18Thereis nothingwrongwith a boldvision,butAsh becameso wed
ded to his quixoticquest that, accordingto BusinessWeek, he refusedto
confrontthe mounting evidence that his plan was doomed to fail and
mighttake down the rest ofthe companywith it.19 He insistedonmilking
cash from profitablearenas, eroding the core business while throwing
moneyaftera gambitthathad littlechanceofsuccess.20
Later,afterAsh was thrownout ofofficeand the companyhad filed for
bankruptcy(from which it did later emerge),he still refusedto confront
reality,saying:"We lostsome battles,butwe were winningthe war."21 But$5,000
$4,000
$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
1963
Good to Great 71
Pitney Bowes versus Addressograph
Annual Revenues, 1963-1998
Constant 1998 Dollars, in Millions
1970 1980 1990
Pitney Bowes
Addressograph
1998
Addressographwas not even closeto winningthe war, and peoplethrough
out the company knew it at the time.Yet the truth went unheard until it
was too late.22 In fact, many ofAddressograph'skey people bailed out of
the company,dispiritedby their inabilityto get top managementto deal
with the facts.23
Perhapswe shouldgive Mr. Ash some creditfor beinga visionarywho
triedto push his companytogreaterheights.(And, tobe fair, theAddress
ograph board fired Ash before he had a chance to fully carry out his
plans.)24But theevidencefrom a slew ofrespectablearticleswrittenatthe
time suggeststhatAsh turneda blind eye to any realityinconsistentwith
his own vision of the world.
-f^^W^^^^f^ withcpursuingvavisibn;forgreatness.Afteralt
s,r;i&£^ to-,createigreataess.But,
.V;*i#^ft^.^^^sia^ gqwpapies,,th$gQ6d-fe^great,pampariie$con-
^ti^ ofrr&ility.,;72 Jim Collins
"When you turn over rocks and look at all the squigglythings under
neath, youcan eitherput therock down, or youcan say, 'My jobisto turn
over rocks and lookat the squigglythings/ even if whatyou see can scare
the hell out ofyou."25That quote,from PitneyBowes executiveFred Pur
due, could have come from any of the PitneyBowes executiveswe inter
viewed.Theyall seemeda bit,well, to be blunt,neuroticand compulsive
aboutPitney'spositionin theworld. "This isa culturethat isvery hostile
tocomplacency,"said oneexecutive.26"We have an itch thatwhatwe just
accomplished,no matterhow great, is never going to be good enough to
sustain us," saidanother.27
Pitney'sfirst managementmeetingof thenew year typicallyconsisted
of about fifteen minutes discussing the previous year (almost always
superbresults)andtwo hourstalkingaboutthe"scarysquigglythings"that
mightimpedefutureresults.28PitneyBowessalesmeetingswere quitedif
ferentfrom the "aren'twe great" rah-rahsales conferencestypicalat most
companies:The entiremanagementteam wouldlay itselfopento searing
questionsand challengesfrom salespeoplewho dealt directlywith cus
tomers.29The companycreateda long-standingtraditionofforums where
people could stand up and tell senior executiveswhat the companywas
doingwrong,shovingrocks with squigglythingsin theirfaces, andsaying,
"Look!You'd betterpay attentiontothis."30
The Addressographcase, especiallyin contrastto PitneyBowes, illus
trates a vital point. Strong, charismaticleaderslike Roy Ash can all too
easily become the de facto reality driving a company. Throughoutthe
study, we found comparisoncompanieswhere the top leader led with
such force or instilled such fear that people worried more about the
leader—whathe would say, what he would think, what he would do—
than they worriedaboutexternalrealityand what itcoulddo to the com
pany. Recall the climateat Bank ofAmerica,describedin the previous
chapter,whereinmanagerswould not even make a commentuntil they
knew how the CEO felt. We did not find this pattern at companies like
Wells Fargo and PitneyBowes, where people were much more worried
about the scary squigglythings than about the feelings of top manage
ment.
The moment a leaderallowshimselfto becomethe primaryrealitypeo
ple worry about, ratherthan realitybeing the primaryreality,you have a
recipe for mediocrity,or worse. This is one of thekey reasons why less
charismaticleadersoftenproducebetterlong-termresultsthan their more
charismatic counterparts.Good to Great 73
;v {nde?$ iw ithqse pf you wfth a strong, charismatic personality,it is
/; wortHwlSlie be as much a liabil-
o ifyasmasset, Your strength of personalitycan sow the seeds of
;^proWe^s,when?pepplefilterthe brutal facts from you. You can over-
vjeorrieih§ febi)iti$sqf having charisma,but it does requireconscious
-attention,. , ;.
Winston Churchill understoodthe liabilitiesof his strongpersonality,
and he compensatedfor them beautifullyduring the SecondWorld War.
Churchill, as you know, maintained a bold and unwaveringvision that
Britain would not just survive,but prevailas a great nation—despite the
wholeworld wonderingnot ifbut when Britainwould sue for peace. Dur
ing the darkest days, with nearly all of Europe and North Africa under
Nazi control, the United States hoping to stay out of the conflict, and
Hitler fighting a one-front war (he had not yet turned on Russia),
Churchill said: "We areresolvedto destroyHitler andeveryvestigeof the
Nazi regime.From this, nothingwill turn us.Nothing!We will neverpar
ley. We will never negotiatewith Hitleror any of hisgang. We shallfight
him by land. We shall fight him by sea. We shall fight him in the air.
Until,with God's help, wehave rid the earth of hisshadow."31
Armed with this bold vision, Churchill never failed, however, to con
front the most brutal facts. He feared that his towering, charismatic
personalitymight deter bad news from reaching him in its starkestform.
So, early in the war, he created an entirely separate department outside
the normal chain of command, calledtheStatisticalOffice,with the prin
cipal function of feeding him—continuously updated and completely
unfiltered—themostbrutal facts ofreality.32He reliedheavilyon this spe
cial unit throughout thewar, repeatedlyaskingfor facts, just the facts. As
the Nazi panzers swept across Europe, Churchill went to bed and slept
soundly: "I. . . had no need for cheering dreams," he wrote. "Facts are
better than dreams."33
A CLIMATE WHERE THE TRUTH IS HEARD
Now, you might be wondering, "How do you motivate people with brutal
facts? Doesn't motivationflow chiefly from a compelling vision?" The74 Jim Collins
answer, surprisingly,is, "No." Not because vision is unimportant, but
because expendingenergy trying to motivatepeople islargelya waste of
time. One of the dominant themesthat runs throughout this book is that
ifyou successfullyimplement itsfindings,youwill not need to spend time
and energy"motivating"people. Ifyou have the right people on the bus,
theywill be self-motivated.The real questionthen becomes:How doyou
manage in such a way as not tode-motivatepeople?And one of the single
mostde-motivatingactionsyoucan take isto hold outfalse hopes,soonto
be sweptaway by events.
How do you create a climate where the truth is heard? We offer four
basicpractices:
J. Leadwith questions,notanswers.
In 1973,one yearafter he assumedCEO responsibilityfrom his father,
Alan Wurtzel'scompanystood at the brink ofbankruptcy,dangerously
close to violation of its loan agreements.At the time, the company
(then named Wards,not to beconfusedwith MontgomeryWard) was a
hodgepodge of appliance and hi-fi stores with no unifying concept.
Over the nextten years,Wurtzeland his team not onlyturned the com
pany around, but also created the Circuit City concept and laid the
foundationsfor a stunningrecordofresults,beatingthe market twenty-
two times from its transition date in 1982to January 1, 2000.
When Alan Wurtzel started the longtraversefrom near bankruptcy
to these stellarresults,he began with aremarkableanswerto the ques
tion of where to take thecompany:I don'tknow. Unlike leaders such as
Roy Ash of Addressograph,Wurtzel resisted the urge to walk in with
"the answer." Instead, once he put the right people on the bus, he
began not with answers, but with questions. "Alan was a real spark,"
said a board member. "He had an abilityto askquestions that were justGood to Great 75
marvelous. We had some wonderful debates in the boardroom. It was
never just a dog and ponyshow, where you would just listen and then
go to lunch."34Indeed,Wurtzel stands as one of thefew CEOs in a
large corporation who put more questions to his board members than
they put to him.
He used the same approach with his executive team, constantly
pushingand probingand proddingwith questions.Each stepalongthe
way, Wurtzelwouldkeep askingquestionsuntil he had a clear picture
of reality and its implications."They used to call me the prosecutor,
becauseI wouldhome in on a question,"saidWurtzel."You know, like
a bulldog,I wouldn't let go until Iunderstood.Why,why, why?"
Like Wurtzel,leaders in each of the good-to-greattransitionsoper
ated with asomewhatSocraticstyle. Furthermore,they usedquestions
for one and only one reason: to gain understanding.They didn't use
questions as a form of manipulation ("Don't you agree with me on
that? . . .")or asa way to blameor putdown others("Whydid youmess
this up? ..."). When we asked the executivesabouttheir management
team meetingsduring thetransitionera, theysaidthat they spent much
ofthe time "justtryingto understand."
The good-to-greatleaders made particularlygood use of informal
meetingswhere they'd meet with groups of managersand employees
with no script, agenda, or set of actionitems to discuss. Instead,they
would startwith questionslike: "So, what's on your mind?" "Can you
tell me aboutthat?""Can you help meunderstand?""What should we
be worriedabout?"Thesenon-agendameetingsbecamea forum where
current realities tended to bubble to the surface.
^;;Mi^ilf^ffoW;'|godr:t|^|feat*<$j^'j^ wrth/the
,-1 ;^||^^^ ey#f^^ wfea
^ti^^ r^^^^^^m^;^ tftfrelies-
2. Engagein dialogueand debate,notcoercion.
In 1965, you could hardly find acompany more awfiil than Nucor. It
had only onedivisionthat mademoney. Everythingelse drainedcash.
It had no culture to be proud of. It had no consistent direction. It was76 Jim Collins
on the verge of bankruptcy.Atthe time, Nucor was officiallyknown as
the Nuclear Corporation of America, reflecting its orientation to
nuclear energy products, including the Scintillation Probe (yes, they
reallynamed it that), usedforradiationmeasurement.It had acquired a
seriesof unrelated businessesin such arenasas semiconductor supplies,
rare earth materials,electrostaticoffice copiers,and roof joists. At the
start of its transformation in 1965, Nucor did not manufacture one
ounce of steel. Nor did it make a penny of profit. Thirty years later,
Nucorstoodas thefourth-largeststeelmakerin theworld35andby 1999
made greaterannualprofitsthan any otherAmericansteelcompany.36
How did Nucor transition from the utterly awful Nuclear Corpora
tion of America into perhaps the best steel company inAmerica?First,
Nucor benefitedfrom the emergenceof aLevel 5 leader, KenIverson,
promotedto CEO from generalmanagerof the joistdivision.Second,
Iversongot the rightpeopleon the bus, buildingaremarkableteam of
peoplelike Sam Siegel (describedby one of hiscolleaguesas "the best
moneymanagerin theworld,a magician")and DavidAycock,an oper
ationsgenius.37
And then what?
Like Alan Wurtzel, Iverson dreamed of building a great company,
but refusedto begin with"theanswer"forhowto get there. Instead,he
playedthe role ofSocraticmoderatorin a seriesof ragingdebates."We
establishedan ongoingseriesofgeneralmanagermeetings,and myrole
was more as a mediator," commented Iverson."They were chaos. We
would stay there for hours, ironing out the issues, until we came to
something.... Attimes, the meetingswould get soviolentthat people
almost went across the table at each other.... People yelled. They
waved their arms around and pounded ontables. Faces would get red
and veins bulgedout."38
Iverson'sassistanttells of a scene repeated over the years, wherein
colleagueswould march into Iverson'soffice and yell and scream at
each other, but then emerge with a conclusion.39Argue and debate,
then sell the nuclear business;argue and debate, then focus on steel
joists; argue and debate, then begin to manufacturetheir own steel;
argue and debate, then invest in their own mini-mill; argue and
debate, then build a second mini-mill, and so forth. Nearly all the
Nucor executives we spoke with described a climate of debate,
wherein the company's strategy "evolved through many agonizing
argumentsand fights."40Good to Great n
?$$&Hm$zpall14fe|^obd^gce^4scQppnl^^Wstda penchant for
j^^feN^-f^jM',p^^er^*,tl»;"«^ci^:%rttf intewwtranscriptsfrom"
;; ^ tolet
3. Conductautopsies,withoutblame.
In 1978, PhilipMorris acquiredthe Seven-UpCompany,only to sell
it eight years later at a loss.41 The financial loss was relativelysmall
compared to Philip Morris's total assets, but it was a highly visible
blackeye thatconsumedthousandsofhours ofpreciousmanagement
time.
In our interviewswith the Philip Morris executives,we were struck
by how they allbroughtup the debacleon their own and discussedit
openly.Insteadofhidingtheirbig, ugly mistake,theyseemedtofeel an
almosttherapeuticneed totalk aboutit. In his book, Ym a Lucky Guy,
Joe Cullman dedicatesfive pages to dissectingthe 7UP disaster. He
doesn'thold back the embarrassingtruth about how flawed the deci
sion was. It is a five-page clinicalanalysis of the mistake, its implica
tions, and its lessons.
Hundreds,ifnotthousands,ofpeoplehourshad beenspentinautop
sies ofthe 7UP case.Yet, as much as theytalkedaboutthis conspicuous
failure, no onepointedfingers to single out blame. There is only one
exceptionto this pattern:Joe Cullman,standingin front ofthe mirror,
pointingthe finger rightat himself."[It] ... becameapparentthat this
was anotherJoe Cullmanplan that didn'twork," he writes.42He goes
even further, implyingthat if he'd only listened better to the people
who challengedhis idea at the time, the disaster might have been
averted.He goes outofhis way to give credittothose who were rightin
retrospect,namingthose specificindividualswho were more prescient
than himself.
In an era when leadersgo to great lengthsto preservethe image of
their own track record—steppingforth to claim creditabout how they
were visionarywhen their colleagueswere not, but finding others to
blame when their decisionsgo awry—it is quite refreshingto come78 Jim Collins
across Cullman. He set thetone: "J will take responsibilityfor this bad
decision.Butwe will all take responsibilityforextractingthe maximum
learningfrom the tuitionwe've paid."
4. Build"red flag" mechanisms.
Welive in an informationage, when those with more and betterinfor
mation supposedlyhave an advantage.If you look across the rise and
fall oforganizations,however,you will rarelyfind companiesstumbling
because they lackedinformation.
Bethlehem Steel executiveshad known for years about the threat
of mini-millcompanieslike Nucor. They paid littleattention until
they woke up oneday to discoverlarge chunksofmarketshare taken
away.43
Upjohn had plenty of informationthat indicatedsome of its forth
comingproductswouldfail todeliveranticipatedresultsor, worse,had
potentiallyseriousside effects.Yet itoftenignoredthose problems.With
Halcion,for example,an insiderwas quoted in Newsweeksaying,"dis
missing safety concernsabout Halcion had become virtual company
policy."In anothercase when Upjohnfound itselfunderfire, itframed
its problemsas "adversepublicity,"ratherthan confrontingthetruth of
its own shortcomings.44
Executivesat Bank ofAmericahad plentyof informationabout the
realitiesofderegulation,yet theyfailedtoconfrontthe onebigimplica
tionof those realities:In aderegulatedworld,bankingwouldbe a com
modity, and theold perks and genteeltraditionsofbankingwould be
goneforever.Not untilithad lost$1.8 billiondid BankofAmericafully
acceptthis fact. In contrast,Carl ReichardtofWells Fargo, calledthe
ultimaterealistby hispredecessor,hit the brutal facts of deregulation
head-on.45Sorry, fellow bankers,but we can preservethe bankerclass
no more. We've gotto be businessmenwith asmuch attentionto costs
and effectiveness as McDonald's.Good to Great 79
;;* itea|ed|^kfoand/nt>g^^ee^haf^^ttegood-to-grea:tcompanieshad
V/^attprt'rfte iriformation,rhutin turning
:•: rnfotrfeifonlntainfers
One particularlypowerfulway to accomplishthis isthroughred flag
mechanisms.Allow me touse a personalexampleto illustratethe idea.
When teaching by the case method at Stanford Business School, I
issued to each MBA studentan 8.5" x 11" bright red sheet ofpaper,
with the followinginstructions:"This is your red flag for the quarter.If
you raise your hand with your red flag, the classroomwill stop for you.
There are no restrictionson when and how to use your red flag; the
decisionrests entirelyin yourhands.You can use it tovoicean observa
tion, sharea personalexperience,presentan analysis,disagreewith the
professor,challenge a CEO guest, respond to a fellow student, ask a
question, make a suggestion,or whatever. There will be no penalty
whatsoeverfor any use ofa red flag. Your red flag canbe used onlyonce
duringthe quarter.Your red flag is nontransferable;you cannotgive or
sell it to another student."
Withthered flag, I had noidea preciselywhatwouldhappeneach day
in class. In one situation,a studentused her red flag to state, "Professor
Collins, I think you are doing a particularlyineffectivejob of running
classtoday.You are leadingtoo muchwithyourquestionsand stiflingour
independentthinking. Let us think for ourselves."The red flag con
frontedmewith thebrutalfact thatmy own questioningstylestoodinthe
way ofpeople'slearning.Astudentsurveyattheendofthe quarterwould
have given me thatsame information.But the red flag—real time, in
frontof everyonein the classroom—turnedinformationabout the short
comingsofthe class into informationthatI absolutelycouldnotignore.
I got the idea for red flag mechanismsfrom Bruce Woolpert,who
instituteda particularlypowerfuldevicecalledshortpay at his company
Graniterock.Short pay gives the customerfull discretionarypower to
decide whetherand how much to pay on an invoice based upon his
own subjectiveevaluationofhow satisfiedhe feels with a productorser
vice. Short pay is not a refundpolicy. The customer does not need to80 Jim Collins
return the product, nor does he need to call Graniterockfor permis
sion. He simply circles the offendingitem on the invoice,deducts it
from the total, and sends a check for the balance. When I asked
Woolperthis reasonsfor shortpay, he said, "You can geta lot ofinfor
mationfrom customersurveys,but there arealways ways of explaining
away the data. With shortpay, you absolutelyhave to payattentionto
the data. You often don't know that a customer is upset until you lose
that customerentirely.Shortpay acts as an early warningsystem that
forces us toadjustquickly,longbeforewe would lose that customer."
To beclear, we did notgenerallyfind red flag mechanismsas vivid
and dramaticasshortpay in thegood-to-greatcompanies.Nonetheless,
I'vedecidedto includethisideahere,at the urgingofresearchassistant
Lane Hornung. Hornung,who helped me systematicallyresearchand
collate mechanismsacross companiesfor a differentresearch project,
makesthe compellingargumentthatif you'rea fully developedLevel 5
leader,you mightnot need redflag mechanisms.But ifyou are not yet
a Level 5leader,or ifyou suffertheliabilityofcharisma,redflag mech
anismsgive you a practicalandusefultool for turninginformationinto
informationthat cannot be ignored and for creatinga climate where
the truth is heard.*
UNWAVERING FAITH AMID THE BRUTAL FACTS
When Procter& Gamble invadedthe paper-basedconsumer businessin
the late1960s,ScottPaper (thenthe leader)simplyresigneditselfto sec
ond place withouta fight and beganlookingfor ways todiversify.46"The
company had a meetingfor analysts in 1971 that was one of the most
depressingI've everattended,"said oneanalyst."Managementessentially
threw in the towel and said, We've been had.' "47 The once-proud com
pany began to look at its competitionand say, "Here'show we stack up
againstthe best," and sigh, "Oh, well... at leastthere are people in the
businessworse than weare."48Insteadoffiguringout howto get backon
the offensiveand win, Scott justtried to protectwhat it had. Conceding
the top end of themarketto P&G, Scott hoped that, byhidingaway in
*For a more completediscussionofmechanisms,see the article"TurningGoals into
Results:The PowerofCatalyticMechanisms,"HarvardBusinessReview,July-August,
1999.Good to Great 81
the Bcategory,it would be leftalonebythe bigmonsterthat hadinvaded
its turf.49
Kimberly-Clark,on the other hand, viewed competingagainstProcter
& Gamble not as a liability,but as an asset. Darwin Smith and his team
felt exhilaratedby the idea of going up against the best, seeing it as an
opportunity to make Kimberly-Clarkbetter and stronger. They also
viewed it as a way to stimulatethe competitivejuicesofKimberlypeople
at alllevels.At one internalgathering,DarwinSmithstood up andstarted
histalk bysaying,"Okay,I want everyoneto rise in a momentofsilence."
Everyonelooked around,wonderingwhat Darwin was up to. Did some
onedie?And so, aftera momentofconfusion,theyallstood up andstared
at their shoes in reverent silence. After an appropriate pause, Smith
lookedout at the groupandsaid in asombertone, "Thatwas a moment of
silence for P&G."
The place went bananas. Blair White, a director who witnessed the
incident,said, "Hehad everyonewound up inthis thing,all up anddown
thecompany,rightdown tothe plantfloor. We were takingonGoliath!"50
Later, Wayne Sanders (Smith'ssuccessor)described to us the incredible
benefitofcompetingagainstthe best: "Couldwe have a betteradversary
than P&G? Not a chance. I say that becausewe respectthem so much.
They are bigger than we are. They are very talented.They are great at
marketing.Theybeatthehell outofeveryone oftheircompetitors,except
one, Kimberly-Clark.That is oneofthe thingsthatmakes usso proud."51
^P9tt;Paper's;arid Kimberiy-CIark'sdifferingreactions;toP&<ibringu?
;to a vitalpdintJrWconfrontingthe brutalfacfe,the gobd-to-greatcompa
nies lafthe^ strongeranymore resilfent,notweaker and more
^j^pirlfed;Th&eis>a;sens^# exhilaration.thafceomesirifacihg/bead*©n\
the hardWhs; andsayiftg,"We willnevergjyeup. We will rieyercapita
4ate.lt mighttake a long tirxie,but we: w/Wfir^d,^way,to prevail? *
RobertAders of Kroger summed this up nicelyat the end of his inter
view, describingthe psychologyofthe Krogerteam as itfaced the daunting
twenty-yeartask of methodicallyturning over the entire Kroger system.
"Therewas a certainChurchilliancharacterto what we were doing. We
hada verystrongwill tolive,thesensethatwe are Kroger,Krogerwas here
beforeand will behere long afterwe are gone, and, by god, we are going82 Jim Collins
to win thisthing.Itmight take us a hundredyears, but we willpersistfor a
hundredyears, ifthat'swhat ittakes."52
Throughoutour research,we were continuallyremindedofthe "hardi
ness" researchstudiesdone bythe InternationalCommittee forthe Study
ofVictimization.These studieslookedat peoplewhohad sufferedserious
adversity—cancerpatients, prisoners of war, accident victims, and so
forth—andsurvived.Theyfound that peoplefell generallyinto three cat
egories: those who were permanentlydispiritedby the event, those who
got their life back to normal, and those who used the experienceas a
definingevent that made them stronger.53The good-to-greatcompanies
were likethose in the thirdgroup,with the "hardinessfactor."
When Fannie Mae began its transitionin the early 1980s, almost no
one gave it high odds for success, much less for greatness.Fannie Mae
had $56 billion ofloans that were losingmoney. It receivedabout 9 per
cent intereston its mortgageportfoliobut had topay up to 15 percenton
the debt itissued.Multiplythat differencetimes $56billion,and you get
averylargenegativenumber!Furthermore,by charter,FannieMae could
not diversifyoutsidethe mortgagefinancebusiness.Most peopleviewed
Fannie Mae as totally beholden to shifts in the direction of interest
rates—theygo up andFannie Mae loses, they go down and Fannie Mae
wins—andmanybelievedthatFannieMaecouldsucceedonly ifthe gov
ernmentsteppedin toclamp down on interestrates.54"That'stheir only
hope,"said oneanalyst.55
But that's not the way David Maxwell and his newly assembledteam
viewed the situation. They never wavered in their faith, consistently
emphasizingin their interviewswith us thatthey never had the goal to
merelysurvivebut toprevailin the endasa greatcompany.Yes, the inter
estspreadwas a brutalfact thatwas notgoingto magicallydisappear.Fan
nie Mae had no choice but to become the best capital markets player in
the world at managingmortgageinterestrisk. Maxwell and his team set
out to create a newbusinessmodel that woulddepend much less on inter
est rates, involvingthe inventionof very sophisticatedmortgagefinance
instruments.Most analysts responded with derision. "When you've got
$56billion worthofloansin placeand underwater,talkingabout new pro
grams is a joke," said one. "That'slike Chrysler[then asking for federal
loanguaranteesto staveoffbankruptcy]goingintothe aircraftbusiness."56
After completingmy interviewwith David Maxwell, I asked how he
and histeam dealtwiththe naysayersduringthosedark days. "It was never
an issue internally,"he said. "Ofcourse,wehad to stop doinga lot of stu-Good to Great 83
pid things,and we had to inventa completelynew set of financialdevices.
But we never entertained thepossibilitythat wewouldfail. We weregoing
to use the calamity as an opportunity to remake Fannie Mae into a great
company."57
During a research meeting, a team member commented that Fannie
Mae reminded her of an old television show, The Six Million Dollar Man
with LeeMajors.The pretextofthe seriesisthat an astronautsuffersa seri
ous crash while testing a moon landing craft over asouthwesterndesert.
Instead of justtryingto save the patient, doctorscompletelyredesignhim
into a superhumancyborg,installingatomic-poweredroboticdevicessuch
as a powerfulleft eye and mechanicallimbs.58 Similarly,David Maxwell
and his team didn't use the fact that Fannie Mae was bleeding and near
death as a pretext to merelyrestructure the company. They used it as an
opportunity to create something muchstrongerand more powerful.Step
by step, day by day, month by month, the Fannie Mae team rebuilt the
entire businessmodel around risk managementand reshaped the corpo
rate culture into a high-performancemachine that rivaled anything on
Wall Street, eventuallygenerating stock returns nearly eight times the
market over fifteenyears.
THE STOCKDALE PARADOX
Of course, not all good-to-greatcompaniesfaced a dire crisis like Fannie
Mae; fewer than half did. But every good-to-greatcompany facedsignifi
cant adversityalong the way to greatness,of one sort or another—Gillette
and the takeoverbattles,Nucor and imports,Wells Fargo and deregula
tion, PitneyBowes losingits monopoly,AbbottLabs and a huge product
recall, Krogerand the need to replace nearly 100percent of itsstores,and
so forth. In every case,the managementteam respondedwith a powerful
psychologicalduality.On the one hand, theystoicallyaccepted the brutal
facts of reality.On the other hand, they maintained an unwaveringfaith
in the endgame,and a commitmentto prevailasa greatcompany despite
the brutal facts. We came to call this dualitytheStockdaleParadox.
The name refers to Admiral Jim Stockdale, who was the highest-
ranking United States militaryofficerin the "Hanoi Hilton" prisoner-of-
war camp during the height of the Vietnam War. Tortured over twenty
times during his eight-year imprisonment from 1965 to 1973, Stockdale
livedout the warwithout any prisoner'srights,no set releasedate, and no84 Jim Collins
certaintyas to whether hewould evensurviveto see hisfamilyagain. He
shoulderedthe burden of command,doing everythinghe could to create
conditions that would increase the number of prisonerswho would sur
vive unbroken,whilefightingan internalwaragainsthis captorsand their
attemptsto usethe prisonersforpropaganda.Atone point,he beat himself
with astool and cut himselfwith a razor,deliberatelydisfiguringhimself,
so that he could not be put on videotapeas an example of a"well-treated
prisoner." He exchanged secret intelligence information with his wife
through their letters, knowing that discoverywould mean more torture
and perhaps death. He instituted rules that would help people to deal
with torture (no one can resisttorture indefinitely,so he created a step
wise system—afterx minutes, you can say certain things—thatgave the
men milestones to survive toward). He instituted an elaborate internal
communications systemto reduce the senseof isolationthat their captors
tried to create, which used a five-by-fivematrix of tap codes for alpha
characters.(Tap-tapequals the lettera, tap-pause-tap-tapequals the letter
b, tap-tap-pause-tapequals the letterf, and so forth, fortwenty-fiveletters,
c doubling in fork.) Atone point, during an imposedsilence, the prison
ersmoppedand sweptthe centralyard usingthe code,swish-swashingout
"We love you" to Stockdale,on the third anniversaryof his being shot
down. After his release, Stockdale became the first three-star officer in the
history of the navy to wear both aviator wings and the Congressional
Medal of Honor.59
You can understand,then, my anticipationat the prospectof spending
part of an afternoon with Stockdale.One of my students had written his
paperon Stockdale,whohappenedto be a seniorresearchfellowstudying
the Stoicphilosophersat theHooverInstitutionrightacrossthe streetfrom
my office,and Stockdaleinvitedthe two of us for lunch. In preparation, I
read In Loveand War, the book Stockdale and his wife had written in alter
nating chapters,chroniclingtheir experiencesduring those eightyears.
As I moved through the book, I found myselfgettingdepressed.It just
seemed so bleak—the uncertainty of his fate, the brutality of his captors,
and so forth. And then, it dawned on me: "Here I am sitting in my warm
and comfortable office, looking out over the beautiful Stanford campus
on a beautifulSaturdayafternoon.I'm gettingdepressedreadingthis, and
I knowthe end of thestory! I know that he gets out, reuniteswith his fam
ily, becomes a national hero, andgets to spend the later years of his life
studyingphilosophyon this same beautiful campus. If itfeels depressingGood to Great 85
for me, how on earth did he deal with it when he was actually there and
didnot know theendof the story?"
"I never lostfaith in the end ofthestory,"he said, when I asked him. "I
never doubted not onlythat Iwould get out, butalso that I would prevail
in the end and turn the experienceinto the defining event of my life,
which, in retrospect,I would not trade."
I didn't say anythingfor manyminutes,and we continued theslow walk
toward the faculty club, Stockdalelimping and arc-swinginghis stiffleg
that had never fullyrecoveredfrom repeatedtorture. Finally, after about a
hundred meters of silence, I asked, "Who didn't make it out?"
"Oh, that's easy,"he said. "The optimists."
"The optimists?I don't understand,"I said, now completelyconfused,
given what he'd saida hundred metersearlier.
"The optimists.Oh, theywere the oneswhosaid,We're goingto be out
by Christmas.' And Christmas would come, and Christmas would go.
Then they'd say, 'We're going to be out by Easter.' And Easter would
come, and Easterwould go.And thenThanksgiving,and then it would be
Christmas again. And they died of a broken heart."
Anotherlong pause,and morewalking.Then he turned to me and said,
"This is a very important lesson. You must never confuse faith that you
willprevailin the end—whichyou can neveraffordto lose—withthe dis
cipline to confront the most brutal facts of your current reality,whatever
they might be."
To this day, I carrya mental image ofStockdaleadmonishing the opti
mists: "We're not getting out byChristmas;deal with it!"
That conversationwithAdmiralStockdalestayedwith me, and in fact had
a profound influence on myowndevelopment.Lifeis unfair—sometimes
to our advantage, sometimes to our disadvantage.We will all experience
disappointmentsand crushing eventssomewherealong the way, setbacks
for which there is no "reason," no one to blame. It might be disease; it
might be injury;it might be anaccident;it might be losinga lovedone; it
might be getting swept away in a politicalshake-up;it might be getting
shot down over Vietnam and thrown into a POW camp for eight years.
What separates people, Stockdale taught me, is not the presence or86 Jim Collins
absence ofdifficulty,but how they deal with theinevitabledifficultiesof
life. In wresdingwith life's challenges,the StockdaleParadox(you must
retainfaith that youwill prevailin the endand youmust also confrontthe
most brutalfacts of your currentreality)has proved powerfulfor coming
backfrom difficultiesnot weakened,but stronger—notjustforme, but for
all those who'velearnedthe lessonand triedtoapplyit.
I neverreallyconsideredmywalk withStockdaleas part of myresearch
into great companies, categorizingit more as a personal rather than cor
porate lesson. But as weunraveledthe researchevidence,I kept coming
backto it in myown mind. Finally,one dayduring aresearch-teammeet
ing, I shared theStockdalestory.There was silence around the table when
I finished,and I thought,"They mustthink I'mreallyout in leftfield."
Then Duane Duffy, a quiet and thoughtful team member who had
done the A&P versus Krogeranalysis,said, "That's exactlywhat I've been
strugglingwith. I've beentryingto get my hands around theessentialdif
ference between A&P and Kroger. And that's it. Kroger was like Stock-
dale, andA&P was likethe optimistswhoalwaysthought they'd be out by
Christmas."
Then other team membersbegan to chime in, noting the samediffer
ence betweentheir comparisonsets—WellsFargoversusBankof America
both facing deregulation,Kimberly-Clarkversus Scott Paper bothfacing
the terrible might of Procter & Gamble, Pitney Bowes versus Addresso
graph both facing the loss of their monopolies,Nucor versus Bethlehem
Steel both facing imports,and so forth. They all demonstratedthis para
doxicalpsychologicalpattern,and we dubbed it theStockdaleParadox.
The StockdaleParadoxis a signatureof all those who creategreatness,
be it in leading their ownlives or in leadingothers.Churchill had it dur
ing the Second World War. AdmiralStockdale,like Viktor Frankl before
him, lived it in a prison camp. And while our good-to-greatcompanies
cannot claim to have experiencedeither the grandeur of saving the freeGood to Great 87
world or thedepth ofpersonalexperienceoflivingin a POWcamp,they
all embraced the Stockdale Paradox. It didn't matter how bleak the situa
tion or how stultifyingtheir mediocrity,they all maintainedunwavering
faith that theywould not justsurvive,but prevailasa greatcompany.And
yet, at thesame time, they becamerelentlesslydisciplinedat confronting
the most brutal facts of their current reality.
Like much of what we found in our research,the keyelements of great
ness aredeceptivelysimpleandstraightforward.The good-to-greatleaders
were ableto stripawaysomuch noiseandclutterand justfocus on thefew
things that would have the greatestimpact. They were able to do so in
largepartbecausetheyoperatedfrom both sidesofthe StockdaleParadox,
never lettingone side overshadowthe other. Ifyou are able to adoptthis
dualpattern,you will dramaticallyincreasethe odds ofmakinga seriesof
good decisionsand ultimatelydiscoveringa simple,yetdeeplyinsightful,
conceptfor makingthe reallybigchoices.And onceyou have thatsimple,
unifyingconcept,you will beveryclosetomakinga sustainedtransitionto
breakthroughresults.It isto thecreationofthat conceptthatwe now turn.CONFRONT THE BRUTAL FACTS
( Y E T N E V E R I O S E F A I T H )
KEY POINTS T
• All good-to-greatcompaniesbeganthe processoffindinga path to
greatnessby confrontingthe brutalfacts oftheircurrentreality; :
• When you startwith an honestarid diligentefforttodeterminethe
truth of your situation, the right decisions often become self-
evident It is impossibleto make good decisionswithoutinfusing
the entire processwithan honest confrontationofthe brutal facts.
• Aprimarytask intakinga companyfrom good togreatis tocreated
culturewhereinpeoplehave atremendousopportunitytobe heard
and, ultimately,forthe truth to beheard. ;
• Creating a climate where the truth is heard involves four basic
practices:
1. Lead withquestions,not answers.
2. Engagein dialogueand debate,not coercion.
3. Conduct autopsies,without blame.
4. Build red flag mechanismsthat turn informaitioriinto informa
tion that cannot beignored.
• The good-to-greatcompaniesfaced just as much adversityas the
comparisoncompanies,but respondedto thatadversitydifferently.
They hit the realitiesoftheir situationhead-on.As a result, they
emergedfrom adversityeven stronger,
• Akey psychologyfor leadingfrom good to great is the Stockdale
Paradox: Retain absolutefaith thatyou can andwill prevailin the
end, regardlessof the difficulties,AND at the same time confront
the mostbrutalfacts ofyourcurrentreality,whateverthey mightbe.Good to Great 89
UNEXPECTED FINDINGS
Charisma can be as much a liabilityas an asset, as the strength of
yourleadershippersonalitycan deter peoplefrom bringingyou the
brutal facts.
Leadership does not begin just with vision. It begins with getting
people to confront the brutalfacts and to act on theimplications.
Spendingtime and energytryingto "motivate"people is awaste of
effort.The real question is not, "Howdo wemotivateour people?"
If you have the rightpeople,theywill be self-motivated.The keyis
to not cfe-motivatethem. One of the primaryways to de-motivate
peopleisto ignorethe brutalfacts ofreality.JS H A EL..T E fL
Simplicity within the Three Circles)
Level 5 First Who. .. Confront the
Leadership Then What Brutal Facts
Culture of Technology
Discipline Accelerators
Know thyself.
—Scribes of Delphi,
via Plato1
%re you ahedgehogor afox?
In hisfamousessay"The Hedgehogand the Fox," IsaiahBerlin divided
the world into hedgehogsand foxes, based upon an ancient Greek para
ble: "The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big
thing."2The fox isa cunningcreature,able to devisea myriadofcomplex
strategiesforsneak attacksupon the hedgehog.Dayin and dayout, the fox
circles around the hedgehog's den, waiting for the perfect moment to
pounce. Fast, sleek, beautiful, fleet offoot, and crafty—thefox looks like
the surewinner.The hedgehog,on the other hand, isadowdiercreature,
lookinglikea genetic mix-upbetweena porcupineand a smallarmadillo.
He waddles along, going about his simple day, searching for lunch and
taking care of his home.
The fox waits in cunningsilenceat the juncturein thetrail.The hedge
hog, minding his own business,wanders right into the path of the fox.Good to Great 91
"Aha, I've gotyou now!" thinksthefox. Heleaps out,boundingacrossthe
ground,lightningfast. The litde hedgehog,sensingdanger,looks up and
thinks,"Here we go again. Will he ever learn?"Rollingup into aperfect
little ball, the hedgehogbecomesa sphere of sharp spikes, pointingout
ward in alldirections.The fox, boundingtowardhis prey, sees the hedge
hogdefenseand calls offthe attack. Retreatingback to theforest, the fox
beginstocalculatea new lineofattack.Each day, some versionofthis bat
tle betweenthe hedgehogand thefox takes place,and despitethe greater
cunning of thefox, the hedgehogalwayswins.
Berlin extrapolatedfrom this little parable to divide people into two
basic groups: foxes and hedgehogs.Foxes pursue many ends at the same
time and seetheworldin allits complexity.Theyare "scatteredordiffused,
movingon manylevels,"says Berlin,never integratingtheir thinkinginto
one overall concept or unifyingvision. Hedgehogs,on the other hand,
simplifya complexworldintoa singleorganizingidea,a basicprincipleor
conceptthat unifiesand guideseverything.Itdoesn'tmatterhowcomplex
the world, a hedgehogreducesall challengesand dilemmasto simple—
indeed almostsimplistic—hedgehogideas. Fora hedgehog,anythingthat
doesnot somehowrelateto the hedgehogidea holdsno relevance.
Princeton professor Marvin Bressler pointed out the power of the
hedgehogduringone ofour long conversations:"You wantto know what
separatesthose who make the biggestimpactfrom all the otherswho are
just assmart? They're hedgehogs."Freud and the unconscious, Darwin
and natural selection, Marx and class struggle, Einstein and relativity,
Adam Smith and divisionof labor—theywere allhedgehogs.They took a
complexworldand simplifiedit. "Thosewholeavethe biggestfootprints,"
said Bressler, "have thousands calling after them, 'Good idea, but you
went too far!'"3
To beclear,hedgehogsare notstupid.Quite thecontrary.They under
stand that the essence of profound insightis simplicity.What could be
more simple than e = mc2? What could besimplerthan the idea of the
unconscious, organized into an id, ego, and superego?What could be
more elegant than Adam Smith's pin factory and "invisiblehand"? No,
the hedgehogsaren't simpletons;they have a piercinginsightthat allows
them to seethrough complexityand discernunderlyingpatterns.Hedge
hogs see what isessential,and ignorethe rest.
What does all this talk ofhedgehogsand foxes have to do with good to
great? Everything.92 Jim Collins
:MMMMMMMMM
Considerthe case ofWalgreensversus Eckerd. Recall how Walgreens
generated cumulative stock returns from the end of 1975 to 2000 that
exceeded the market by over fifteen times, handily beating such great
companiesas GE,Merck,Coca-Cola,and Intel. It was a remarkableper
formance for such an anonymous—somemight even say boring—com
pany. When interviewingCorkWalgreen,I keptaskinghim to godeeper,
to help usunderstandthese extraordinaryresults.Finally,in exasperation,
he said, "Look, it just wasn'tthat complicated!Once we understoodthe
concept,we justmoved straightahead."4
Whatwas theconcept?Simplythis:thebest,mostconvenientdrugstores,
with high profitpercustomervisit.That'sit. That'sthebreakthroughstrat
egy that Walgreensused to beat Intel, GE,Coca-Cola,and Merck.
In classichedgehogstyle,Walgreenstookthis simpleconceptand imple
mentedit with fanaticalconsistency.It embarkedon a systematicprogram
to replaceallinconvenientlocationswith more convenientones,preferably
cornerlotswherecustomerscouldeasilyenterand exitfrom multipledirec
tions. Ifa greatcornerlocationwouldopenup justhalfa blockawayfrom a
profitableWalgreensstore in agood location,the companywouldclosethe
goodstore(evenata costof$1 milliontogetoutofthelease)toopena great
new store on thecorner.5Walgreenspioneereddrive-throughpharmacies,
found customersliked the idea, and built hundreds of them. In urban areas,
the companyclusteredits storestightlytogether,on the preceptthat no one
shouldhavetowalkmore thana few blocksto reachaWalgreens.6In down
town San Francisco,for example,Walgreensclusterednine storeswithina
one-mileradius. Nine stores!7 If you look closely,you will see Walgreens
storesasdenselypackedin some citiesasStarbuckscoffeeshops in Seattle.
Walgreensthen linked its convenienceconceptto a simple economic
idea, profit per customer visit. Tight clustering(nine stores per mile!)
leads to localeconomiesof scale,which providesthe cash for more clus
tering,which in turn draws more customers.By addinghigh-marginser-$750
$500
Good to Great 93
Walgreens Versus Selected Great Companies
Cumulative Stock Returns of $1 Invested,
December 31, 1975 - January 1, 2000
Walgreens: $562
IV Intel: $309
$250 A/ JI
vices, like one-hour photodeveloping,Walgreensincreased its profit per
customer visit. More convenience led to more customer visits, which,
when multiplied times increased profit per customer visit, threw cash
back into the system to build even more convenient stores. Store by store,
blockbyblock,citybycity,regionbyregion,Walgreensbecamemoreand
more ofa hedgehogwiththis incrediblysimpleidea.
In a world overrun by managementfaddists,brilliant visionaries,rant
ing futurists,fearmongers,motivationalgurus,and all therest, it's refresh
ing to see a companysucceed sobrilliantlybytakingone simple concept
and just doing it withexcellenceand imagination.Becomingthe best in
the worldat convenient drugstores,steadilyincreasingprofitper customer
visit—whatcould be more obviousand straightforward?
Yet, if it was so obviousand straightforward,why didn't Eckerd see it?
While Walgreensstuck only to cities where it could implement the con
venience/clusteringconcept, we found noevidence of a similarlycoher
ent concept for growth at Eckerd. Deal makers to the core, Eckerd's
executives compulsively leapt at opportunities to acquire clumps of
stores—forty-twounits here, thirty-sixunits there—in hodgepodge fash
ion, with noobviousunifyingtheme.94 Jim Collins
While Walgreensexecutivesunderstoodthat profitablegrowth would
come by pruningaway all that did not fit with the HedgehogConcept,
Eckerd executiveslurched after growth for growth's sake. In the early
1980s, just as Walgreensbecame religiousabout carryingout its conve
nient drugstoreconcept, Eckerd threw itselfinto the home video market
with its purchaseofAmericanHome Video Corporation.Eckerd'sCEO
toldForbesmagazinein 1981,"Somefeel the purer weare the betterwe'll
be. But Iwant growth, and thehome video industryis only emerging—
unlike,say, drugstorechains."8Eckerd'shome video foray produced$31
millionin losses beforeEckerdsold it toTandy,which crowedthatit got
the deal for $72 million below book value.9
In the precise year of Eckerd's American Home Video acquisition,
Walgreensand Eckerdhad virtuallyidenticalrevenues($1.7 billion).Ten
years later, Walgreenshad grown to over twice the revenues of Eckerd,
accumulatingnet profits$1 billiongreaterthan Eckerd over the decade.
Twenty years later, Walgreens was going strong, as one of the most
sustainedtransformationsin ourstudy.Meanwhile,Eckerdceasedto exist
asan independentcompany.10
THE THREE CIRCLES
The notion of a Hedgehog Concept originated in our research team
meetingswhen we were tryingto make sense of Walgreens'spectacular
returns.
"Aren'twe justtalkingaboutstrategy?"I asked."Convenientdrugstores,
profitper customervisit—isn'tthat justbasic strategy?What's so interest
ing about that?"
"But Eckerd also had strategy,"said Jenni Cooper, whoanalyzed the
contrastbetweenthe two companies."Wecan't say that it's justabout hav
ing strategy.They both had strategy."Jenniwas correctin her observation.
Strategyper se did notdistinguishthe good-to-greatcompaniesfrom the
comparisoncompanies.Both sets of companieshad strategicplans, and
there isabsolutelyno evidencethat thegood-to-greatcompaniesinvested
moretime and energyin strategydevelopmentand long-rangeplanning.
"Okay,soare we justtalkingaboutgood strategyversusbad strategy?"
The team sat there for a minute, thinking. Then Leigh Wilbanks
observed,"ButwhatI find sostrikingistheir incrediblesimplicity.I mean,
look at Kroger with the superstoreconcept, or Kimberly-Clarkwith theGood to Great 95
move to paper-basedconsumerproducts,or Walgreenswith convenient
drugstores.Thesewere simple,simple,simpleideas."
The research-teammembersall jumped into thefray, bantering about
the companiesthey were studying.It soon becameabundantlyclearthat
all the good-to-greatcompaniesattaineda very simple conceptthat they
used as a frame of referencefor all theirdecisions,and this understanding
coincidedwithbreakthroughresults.Meanwhile,the comparisoncompa
nies like Eckerd got alltripped up by theirsnazzy strategiesfor growth.
"Okay,"I pushedback, "but issimplicityenough?Just becauseit'ssimple
doesn'tmean it'sright. The world isfilled with failed companiesthat had
simple but wrong ideas."
Then we decided to undertakea systematiclook at the concepts that
guidedthe good-to-greatcompaniesin contrasttothe comparisoncompa
nies. After a few months of sifting and sorting, consideringpossibilities
and tossingthem out,we finallycameto seethat the HedgehogConcept
in eachgood-to-greatcompanywasn'tjustanyrandomsimpleidea.
%ie ;ess;entiarstrategic difference betwete^
.q^mpari^Qncd$0aWeslay in two fundamentll;dilttoc^lojl^First,,the
gpod-tp-gfeat companies founded their stfafegles:on d'e&p under
standingalongthree key dimensrons^wha!we came,to call the thr^e
cirdles.Second,the good-to-greatcompaniesIfanslaifedthatfiinctef-
.standing,:into a simple, ciystalljne,concept i^'a^'..gMid^/^•/^liiBi.r.-"
,feffortS-ihencethe term Hedgehog6onc&fii,r-v*"" :^ t£- ^
More precisely,a Hedgehog Concept is a simple, crystallineconcept
that flows from deep understandingabout the intersectionof the following
three circles:
1.What you can bethe best in the world at (and, equallyimportant, what
you cannotbe the best in the world at). This discerning standardgoes
far beyond core competence. Just because you possess a core compe
tence doesn't necessarilymean you can be the best in the world at it.
Conversely,whatyou can be the bestat might not even besomething
in which you are currentlyengaged.
2. What drives your economic engine. All the good-to-greatcompanies
attainedpiercing insightinto howto mosteffectivelygeneratesustained96 Jim Collins
and robustcash flow and profitability.Inparticular,they discoveredthe
singledenominator—profitperx—thathad thegreatestimpactontheir
economics.(It would be cash flow per x in the socialsector.)
3. What you are deeply passionateabout. The good-to-greatcompanies
focused on those activitiesthat ignitedtheir passion.The idea here is
notto stimulatepassionbutto discoverwhat makes you passionate.
What you are deeply
passionate about
What you can F^^* ^^J What drives
BE THE BESTIN \ / YOUR
THE WORLD AT \ / ECONOMIC
/ ENGINE
Three Circles of the Hedgehog Concept
Toquicklygraspthe threecircles,considerthefollowingpersonalanal
ogy. Supposeyou were able toconstructaworklifethatmeetsthefollowing
threetests. First,you are doingwork for whichyou have a geneticorGod-
giventalent, and perhapsyoucouldbecome one ofthe bestin the worldin
applyingthattalent.("I feel thatI was justborntobe doingthis.")Second,
you are well paidfor whatyou do. ("I getpaidtodo this?Am I dreaming?")
Third,you aredoingwork you are passionateaboutandabsolutelylove to
do, enjoyingtheactualprocessfor its own sake. ("I lookforwardtogetting
upand throwingmyselfinto my dailywork,andI reallybelievein whatI'm
doing.")Ifyou could drivetowardthe intersectionofthese three circlesand
translatethat intersectioninto a simple, crystallineconceptthat guided
your life choices,thenyou'd have a HedgehogConceptfor yourself.Good to Great 97
To have a fully developedHedgehogConcept,you need allthree circles.
Ifyou make a lotof money doing things at which you could never be the
best,you'llonlybuilda successfulcompany,nota greatone. Ifyou become
the bestat something,you'llneverremainon top ifyou don'thave intrinsic ^^\
passionfor whatyou are doing. Finally,you can be passionateall you want, /
butifyou can'tbe the bestat it or it doesn'tmake economicsense,thenyou /
mighthave a lotoffun, butyou won'tproducegreatresults. f
UNDERSTANDING WHAT YOU CAN
(AND CANNOT) BE THE BEST AT
"Theystickwith whattheyunderstandand let theirabilities,not theiregos,
determinewhat they attempt."11Sowrote Warren Buffettabouthis $290
million investmentin Wells Fargo despite his serious reservationsabout
the banking industry.12Prior to clarifyingits HedgehogConcept,Wells
Fargo had tried to be aglobalbank, operatinglike a mini-Citicorp,and a
mediocre one at that. Then, at first under Dick Cooley and then under
Carl Reichardt,Wells Fargoexecutivesbeganto ask themselvesa piercing
set of questions:What can we potentiallydo better than any other com
pany, and, equallyimportant,what can we not do better than any other
company?And ifwe can't be thebestat it, thenwhy arewe doingit atall?
Puttingasidetheiregos,theWells Fargoteam pulledthe plugon thevast
majorityofits internationaloperations,acceptingthe truththatit couldnot
be better than Citicorpin global banking.13Wells Fargo then turned its
attention to what itcouldbe the best in theworld at: running a bank like a
business, with a focus on the western UnitedStates.That's it. That was the
essenceofthe HedgehogConceptthatturned Wells Fargofrom a mediocre
Citicorpwanna-beto one ofthebest-performingbanks in the world.
Carl Reichardt,CEO of Wells Fargo at the time oftransition,standsas
a consummate hedgehog. While his counterpartsat Bank of America
went into a reaction-revolutionpanic mode in responseto deregulation,
hiringchangegurus who used sophisticatedmodelsand time-consuming
encountergroups,Reichardtstrippedeverythingdown to its essentialsim
plicity.14"It's not spacesciencestuff,"he told us in our interview."What
we didwas so simple,and wekept it simple.It was so straightforwardand
obviousthat it sounds almost ridiculousto talk about it. Theaveragebusi
nessman coming from ahighly competitiveindustrywith no regulations
would have jumpedon this like a goose on a Junebug."1598 Jim Collins
Reichardtkept people relentlesslyfocused on the simple hedgehog
idea,continuallyremindingthemthat"there'smore moneytobe made in
Modesto than Tokyo."16Those who worked with Reichardt marveled at
his geniusfor simplicity."IfCarl were an Olympicdiver,"said one ofhis
colleagues,"he would not do a five-fliptwistingthing. He would do the
bestswan dive inthe world,and do itperfecdyover and overagain."17
The Wells Fargo focus on its HedgehogConceptwas so intensethat it
became,in its executives'own words, "amantra."Throughoutourinter
views, Wells Fargo people echoed thesame basic theme—"Itwasn'tthat
complicated.We just took a hard-nosedlook at what we were doing and
decidedtofocus entirelyon thosefew thingswe knew we could do better
than anyone else, not gettingdistractedinto arenas that would feed our
egosand at which we could not be the best."
'^^z-xC;. Ik
Everycompanywouldlike tobethe bestatsomething,butfew actually
understand—withpiercinginsightand egolessclarity—whattheyactually
have thepotentialtobethe bestatand, justas important,whattheycannot
bethe bestat. And itis this distinctionthatstandsas one oftheprimarycon
trastsbetweenthegood-to-greatcompaniesandthe comparisoncompanies.
Consider the contrast between Abbott Laboratoriesand Upjohn. In
1964,thetwo companieswere almostidenticalin termsofrevenues,prof
its, and product lines. Both companieshad the bulk of theirbusinessin
pharmaceuticals,principally antibiotics. Both companies had family
management.Both companieslaggedbehindthe restofthe pharmaceuti
cal industry. But then, in 1974, Abbott had a breakthroughin perfor
mance, producing cumulative returns of 4.0 times the market and 5.5
times Upjohnover the nextfifteenyears. One crucialdifferencebetween
the two companiesis thatAbbottdevelopeda HedgehogConceptbased
on what it could be the bestat and Upjohn did not.
Abbottbegan by confrontingthe brutalfacts. By 1964,Abbotthad lost
the opportunityto become the best pharmaceuticalcompany. WhileGood to Great 99
Abbotthaddrowsilylumberedalong in the 1940s and 1950s,livingoffits
cash cow, erythromycin,companieslike Merckhadbuilt researchengines
that rivaledHarvardand Berkeley.By 1964, George Cain and hisAbbott
team realizedthat Merck and others had such a huge researchlead that
tryingtobethe bestpharmaceuticalcompanywouldbelike a high school
footballteam tryingto take on theDallasCowboys.
Even thoughAbbott'sentire historylay in pharmaceuticals,becoming
the best pharmaceuticalcompany was no longer a viable option. So,
guidedby a Level 5leaderand tappinginto thefaith side ofthe Stockdale
Paradox(Theremustbe a way for usto prevailasa greatcompany,and we
will find it!), the Abbottteam soughtto understandwhat it could be the
best at. Around 1967, a key insightemerged:We've lost the chanceto be
the bestpharmaceuticalcompany,but we have anopportunityto excel at
creatingproductsthatcontributeto cost-effectivehealthcare. Abbotthad
experimentedwith hospitalnutritionalproducts,designedtohelp patients
quicklyregain theirstrengthafter surgery,and diagnosticdevices (one of
the primaryways to reducehealthcare costs isthroughproperdiagnosis).
Abbotteventuallybecame the number onecompanyin both of these are
nas, whichmoved it far down the path of becoming the best company in
the worldatcreatingproductsthatmake healthcare more cost-effective.18
Upjohnneverconfrontedthe same brutalrealityandcontinuedtolive
with the delusion that it could beat Merck.19Later, when it fell even fur
ther behind thepharmaceuticalleaders,it diversifiedinto arenaswhereit
definitelycould not be the bestin theworld,such asplasticsand chemi
cals. As Upjohnfell even furtherbehind,it returnedto afocus on ethical
drugs,yetneverconfrontedthefact thatit was justtoosmallto win in the
big-stakespharmaceuticalgame.20 Despite consistentlyspendingnearly
twice the percentageof sales on R&D asAbbott, Upjohn saw its profits
dwindletoless than halfthoseofAbbottbeforebeingacquiredin 1995.21
? ;1$^^ dif:p$mi$e4e|tfeea^
^yri%pw$ty%i\i:Mdjf^ theworldat
^"j^^t^ff^n^ thenyourbore:t>u$ines£cannotform the basis,of100 Jim Collins
Clearly,a HedgehogConceptis not thesame as a core competence.
You can have competenceat something but not necessarilyhave the
potentialtobe the best in theworld at it. To use an analogy,considerthe
youngpersonwho gets straightA's inhigh schoolcalculusand scoreshigh
on themath partofthe SAT, demonstratinga core competenceat mathe
matics.Doesthat mean the personshouldbecomea mathematician?Not
necessarily. Suppose now that this young person goes off to college,
enrollsin math courses,and continuestoearn A's, yet encounterspeople
who aregeneticallyencodedfor math.As one such student said after this
experience, "It would take me three hours to finish the final. Then there
were those who finishedthe same final in thirty minutesand earned an
A+. Their brains are just wired differendy.I could be a very competent
mathematician, but I soon realized I could never be one of the best." That
youngpersonmightstillgetpressurefrom parentsand friendsto continue
with math, saying,"Butyou're so good at it." Just like our young person,
many peoplehave beenpulledorhave fallen intocareerswheretheycan
neverattaincompletemasteryandfulfillment.Sufferingfrom the curseof
competencebut lackinga clear HedgehogConcept,they rarelybecome
greatat whatthey do.
The HedgehogConceptrequiresa severestandardofexcellence.It'snot
justaboutbuildingonstrengthand competence,butaboutunderstanding
what your organizationtruly has the potentialto be the very bestat and
stickingto it.Like Upjohn,the comparisoncompaniesstuckto businesses
at whichtheywere "good"but couldneverbe thebest, or worse,launched
offin pursuitofeasy growthandprofitsin arenaswhere they had nohope
ofbeingthe best. Theymade moneybutneverbecamegreat.
Everygood-to-greatcompanyeventuallygaineddeep understandingof
this principleand pinned their futures on allocatingresourcesto thoseGood to Great 101
few arenas where they could potentiallybe the best. (See the tablebelow.)
The comparison companies rarelyattained this understanding.
THE GOOD-TO-GREAT COMPANIES AND THE "BEST IN THE
__ WJLR1DiTLJUJULL^
This table shows the understandingthe good-to-greatcompanies attained
that formed the foundation of their shiftfrom good to great. Note: This list
does not show what the companies were alreadybest in the world at when
they began their transitions (most of these companies weren't the best at
anything);rather, itshowswhat they came to understand theycouldbecome
best in the world at.
Abbott Laboratories:
Could become the best at
creating a productportfolio
that lowers the cost of
health care.
Circuit City: Could
become the best at imple
menting the "4-S"model
(service,selection,savings,
satisfaction)applied to big-
ticket consumer sales.
Fannie Mae: Could
become the best capital
marketsplayerin anything
that pertainsto mortgages.
Notes: Abbottconfronted the reality
that it couldnot becomethe bestphar
maceutical company in the world,
despitethe factthat pharmaceuticals
at the time accounted for 99 percent of
its revenues.22 It shifted its focus to creat
ing aportfolioof productsthat con
tribute to lower-cost health care,
principallyhospitalnutritionals,diagnos
tics,and hospitalsupplies.
Notes: Circuit City sawthat it could
become "the McDonald's" of big-ticket
retailing,able to operate a geographi
callydispersedsystemby remote con
trol. Its distinction lay not in the "4-S"
model per se—but in theconsistent,
superiorexecutionof the model.
Notes: The critical insightwasto
see (1) that it could be a full capital
marketsplayeras good as any on
Wall Street and (2) that it could develop
a unique capability to assess risk in
mortgage-relatedsecurities.102 Jim Collins
Gillette: Could become Notes: Gillette saw that it had an unusual
the bestat buildingpremier combinationof twovery differentskills:
globalbrandsof daily (1) the abilityto manufacture billions of
necessitiesthat require low-cost,super-high-toleranceproducts
sophisticatedmanufacturing (e.g.,razorblades)and (2) the abilityto
technology. build globalconsumerbrands—the
"Coke" of blades or toothbrushes.
Kimberly-Clark:Could Notes: Kimberly-Clarkrealized that it
become the best in the had a latentskill at creating"category-
worldat paper-based killer" brands—brands where the name
consumer products. of the product issynonymouswith the
name ofthe category(e.g.,Kleenex)—
in paper-basedproducts.
Kroger: Could become the Notes: Krogeralwayshad a strengthin
best atinnovativesuper- grocerystoreinnovation.It tookthis skill
combo stores. and applied it to the questionof how to
createa combinationstorewith many
innovative,high-margin"mini-stores"
under one roof.
Nucor: Could become the Notes: Nucor came to see that it had
bestat harnessingculture tremendous skill in two activities:
and technologyto produce (1)creatinga performanceculture
low-cost steel. and (2) makingfarsightedbets on new
manufacturingtechnologies.
Bycombiningthese two,it was able to
become the lowest-cost steel
producer in the United States.
Philip Morris:Could Notes: Early in transition, Philip Morris
become the best in the saw that it could become simplythe
worldat building brand besttobaccocompanyin the world.
loyaltyin cigarettesand, Later,it began todiversifyinto non-
later, other consumables. tobaccoarenas(asteptakenbyall tobacco
companies,as a defensivemeasure), but
stayedcloseto itsbrand-buildingstrengths
in "sinful"products (beer, tobacco,
chocolate,coffee)and food products.Pitney Bowes: Could
become the best in the
worldat messagingthat
requires sophisticatedback-
officeequipment.
Walgreens:Could become
the best at convenient drug
stores.
Wells Fargo: Could become
the best at mnning a bank
like a business, with a focus
on the western United States.
Good to Great 103
Notes: AsPitney wrestled with the
question of how toevolvebeyond
postagemeters,it had twokey
insightsabout itsstrengths:(1) that
it was not a postagecompany, but could
have a broader definition(messaging)
and (2) that it had particularstrength in
supplyingthe back roomswithsophisti
cated machines.
Notes: Walgreenssawthat it was
not justadrugstorebut also a conven
ience store. It begansystematicallyseek
ingthe best sitesforconvenience—clus
tering manystoreswithin a small radius
and pioneeringdrive-throughpharma
cies. It also made extensive investments
in technology(including recent Web
sitedevelopments),linkingWalgreen
storesworldwideto create one giant
"corner pharmacy."
Notes: Wells came to two essential
insights.First,most banksthought of
themselves as banks, acted like banks,
and protected the banker culture. Wells
sawitselfas a businessthat happened to
be in banking."Run it like abusiness"
and "Run it like you own it" became
mantras.Second, Wellsrecognized that
it could not be the best in the world as a
superglobalbank, but that it could be
the best in the western United States.104 Jim Collins
INSIGHT INTO YOUR ECONOMIC ENGINE-
WHAT IS YOUR DENOMINATOR?
The good-to-greatcompaniesfrequentlyproduced spectacularreturns in
very unspectacularindustries.The bankingindustryrankedin the bottom
quartile of industries (in total returns) during the same period that
Wells Fargo beat the marketby fourtimes. Even more impressive,both
Pitney Bowes and Nucor were in bottom 5 percent industries; yet both
these companies beat the marketbywell overfive times. Only one of the
good-to-greatcompanies had the benefit of being in a great industry
(definedas a top 10 percentindustry);five were in good industries;five
were in bad to terrible industries.(See Appendix 5.A for a summary of
industryanalysis.)
great ;n4uptry,t-UA-—w* ~~*~**~~*&~»*^~ui>^^^~^ **^ ,
parly iuHl^
They wefi al
intothefr^ondrfitesr^
They wei^ abfefej4o t^rbT#c||sieifey^ftateMi^^ %
v^ /<., /VY^< >:V>lu iV*'F:
This is not a book onmicroeconomics.Each company and each indus
try had its own economicrealities,and I'm not going to belabor them all
here. The central point is that each good-to-greatcompany attained a
deep understandingof thekey driversin itseconomic engine and built its
systemin accordancewiththis understanding.
That said, however,we did notice oneparticularlyprovocativeform of
economic insightthateverygood-to-greatcompanyattained,the notion of
a single "economic denominator." Think about it in terms of the follow
ing question:Ifyou couldpick oneand only one ratio—profitper x (or, in
the socialsector,cashflow perx)—tosystematicallyincreaseovertime, what
x would have the greatestand most sustainableimpact on your economic
engine?We learned that thissinglequestionleadsto profound insightinto
the inner workingsof an organization'seconomics.
Recall howWalgreensswitchedits focus from profit per store to profit
per customervisit. Convenient locationsare expensive,but by increasing
profit per customer visit, Walgreens was able to increase convenience
(nine storesin a mile!)andsimultaneouslyincreaseprofitabilityacross itsGood to Great 105
entire system.The standard metric of profitper store would have run con
traryto the convenience concept. (The quickest way to increase profit per
store is to decrease the number of stores and put them in less expensive
locations.This would havedestroyedthe convenience concept.)
Or consider Wells Fargo. When the Wells team confronted the brutal
fact that deregulation would transformbanking into a commodity, they
realized that standard banker metrics, like profit per loan and profit per
deposit,would no longer be the key drivers. Instead,they graspeda new
denominator: profit per employee. Following this logic, Wells Fargo
became one of the first banksto change its distributionsystemto relypri
marily on stripped-downbranches and ATMs.
ffe-<^nomin^ofean be quitesubtle,sometimeseven unobvious.The
k%i? to use thequestionof the denominatorto gain understanding
arifc^
For example, Fannie Maegraspedthe subtle denominator of profit per
mortgage risk level, not per mortgage (which would be the "obvious"
choice). It's a brilliantinsight.The real driverin Fannie Mae's economics
is the abilityto understandrisk ofdefault in a packageof mortgagesbetter
than anyone else. Then it makes money selling insurance and managing
the spread on that risk. Simple, insightful,unobvious—andright.
Nucor, for example, made its mark in theferociouslyprice competitive
steel industrywith the denominator profitper ton of finished steel. Atfirst
glance, you might think that peremployeeor per fixed cost might be the
proper denominator. But the Nucor people understood that the driving
force in its economic engine was a combination of a strong-work-ethic
culture andthe applicationofadvancedmanufacturingtechnology.Profit
per employee or per fixed cost would not capture this duality as well as
profit per ton of finished steel.
Do you need to have a single denominator? No, but pushing for a sin
gle denominator tends to produce better insight than letting yourselfoff
the hook with three or four denominators. The denominator question
servesas a mechanism toforce deeper understandingof the keydriversin
your economic engine. As the denominator question emerged from the
research, we tested the question on a number of executive teams. We
found that the question always stimulated intense dialogue and debate.106 )im Collins
Furthermore,even incases where the teamfailed (or refused)to identify
a singledenominator,the challengeofthe questiondrove them to deeper
insight.Andthat is,afterall, the point—tohavea denominator not forthe
sake ofhavinga denominator,but for the sake ofgaininginsightthat ulti
matelyleads to more robustand sustainableeconomics.
ECONOMIC DENOMINATOR
Thistableshowsthe economicdenominatorinsightattainedbythe good-to-
greatcompaniesduring the pivotaltransitionyears.
Abbott: per employee Keyinsight:Shiftfromprofitper prod
uct line to profitperemployeefit with
the ideaof contributingto cost-effective
health care.
Circuit City: per Keyinsight: Shiftfrom profitper single
geographicregion storeto profitper regionreflectedlocal
economiesofscale.While per-storeper
formanceremainedvital,regional
groupingwas a keyinsightthat drove
Circuit City's economics beyond Silo's.
Fannie Mae: per mortgage Keyinsight:Shiftfrom profitper mort
risk level gage to profitper mortgagerisk level
reflectedthe fundamentalinsightthat
managinginterestriskreduces depen
dence on the direction of interest rates.
Gillette: per customer Keyinsight:Shiftfromprofitper divi
sion to profitper customerreflectedthe
economicpowerof repeatablepurchases
(e.g.,razorcartridges)timeshigh profit
perpurchase(e.g.,Mach3,notdisposable
razors).
Kimberly-Clark:per Key insight:Shiftfrom profitper fixed
consumer brand asset(the mills) to profitper consumer
brand; would be lesscyclicaland more
profitablein goodtimes and bad.Good to Great 107
Kroger:perlocal Key insight:Shiftfrom profitper
population storeto profitper local population
reflectedthe insight that local market
share drove groceryeconomics.Ifyou
can't attain number one or number two
in localshare,you should not play.
Nucor: pertonof finished Keyinsight: Shiftfrom profitper
steel divisionto profitper ton of finished steel
reflectedNucor's unique blend of high-
productivityculture mixed with mini-
mill technology,rather than just
focusingon volume.
Philip Morris: pei-global Key insight:Shiftfrom profitper
brandcategory sales regionto profitper globalbrand
categoryreflectedthe understanding
that the real keytogreatnesslay in
brandsthat could have global power,
like Coke.
Pitney Bowes: percustomer Key insight:Shiftfrom profitper
postagemeter to profitper customer
reflectedthe idea that Pitney Bowes
could use itspostagemetersas a
jumping-offpoint to bring a range of
sophisticatedproducts into the back
offices of customers.
Walgreens:per Key insight:Shiftfromprofitper
customer visit storeto profitper customervisitreflected
a symbioticrelationshipbetween conve
nient (andexpensive)storesitesand sus
tainable economics.
Wells Fargo: per employee Key insight:Shift from profit
per loan to profit per employee
reflectedunderstanding of the brutal
fact of deregulation: Banking is
a commodity.108 ]im Collins
Allthe good-to-greatcompaniesdiscovereda key economic denomina
tor (see the table on page 106), whilethe comparisoncompanies usually
did not. In fact, we found only one comparison case that attained a pro
found insight into itseconomics.Hasbro built its upswingon the insight
that aportfolioofclassictoys and games,suchasG.I. Joe and Monopoly,
producesmore sustainablecash flow thanbig onetimehits.23In fact, Has
bro isthe one comparisoncompanythat understoodall three circlesofthe
Hedgehog Concept. It became the best in the world at acquiring and
renewingtried-and-truetoys, reintroducingand recyclingthem at just the
righttime to increaseprofitper classicbrand.And itspeople had greatpas
sion for thebusiness.Systematicallybuilding from all three circles, Has
bro became thebest-performingcomparisonin our study,lending further
credence to thepowerofthe HedgehogConcept.
Hasbrobecame an unsustainedtransitionin part because it lost the dis
cipline tostaywithin the threecircles,afterthe unexpecteddeath of CEO
Stephen Hassenfeld.The Hasbrocase reinforcesa vitallesson.Ifyou suc
cessfullyapply these ideas, butthen stop doing them, you will slide back
ward, from great togood, orworse. The only way to remaingreat is tokeep
applyingthe fundamentalprinciplesthat made you great
UNDERSTANDING YOUR PASSION
When interviewing the Philip Morris executives, we encountered an
intensityand passionthat surprisedus. Recallfrom chapter 3 how George
Weissmandescribedworkingat the companyasthe greatlove affairof his
life, second only to his marriage. Even with a most sinful collection of
consumerproducts(Marlborocigarettes,Millerbeer, 67 percentfat-filled
Velveeta, Maxwell House coffee for caffeine addicts, Toblerone for choco
holics,and so forth), we found tremendouspassionfor the business.Most
of the top executivesat Philip Morris were passionate consumers of their
own products. In 1979,Ross Millhiser,then vice chairman of Philip Mor
ris and a dedicatedsmoker,said, "I love cigarettes.It's one of the things
that makes lifereallyworthliving."24
The Philip Morrispeople clearlyloved their company and hadpassion
for what they were doing. It's as if they viewed themselvesas the lone,
fiercely independent cowboy depicted in the Marlboro billboards. "We
have a right to smoke, and we will protect that right!" A board member
told me during myresearchfora previousproject,"I reallylove being onGood to Great 109
theboardofPhilipMorris.It's like beingpartofsomethingreallyspecial."
She said thisas she proudlypuffedaway.25
Now, you might say, "But that is just the defensivenessof the tobacco
industry.Ofcoursethey'dfeel that way. Otherwise,how could they sleep
at night?" But keep in mind that R. J. Reynolds was also in the tobacco
business and under siege from society. Yet, unlike Philip Morris, R. J.
Reynoldsexecutivesbegan to diversifyaway from tobaccointo any arena
whereitcouldget growth,regardlessofwhethertheyhad passionfor those
acquisitionsor whether the company could be the best in the world at
them. The Philip Morris people stuck much closer to the tobacco busi
ness, in large part becausethey loved that business.In contrast,the R. J.
Reynolds people saw tobacco as just a way to make money. As vividly
portrayedin the book Barbariansat the Gate, R. J. Reynolds executives
eventually lost passion for anything except making themselves rich
througha leveragedbuyout.26
Itmayseem odd totalkaboutsomethingas softandfuzzyas "passion"as
an integral part of a strategicframework. But throughoutthe good-to-
great companies,passion became a key part of theHedgehogConcept.
You can'tmanufacturepassionor"motivate"peopletofeel passionate.You
can only discover what ignites your passion and the passions of those
around you.
^^ cm get passionateabout
|^iA^^b%^^r^t^l^^^ox^fetiti^3?;^ft^^^tFi®^^Fii*t.-tor•papers-based-consumer
V^p^iid|'iiilf*r|e£&rt^^ passionateabout
b "$^ productsare okay,
When Gilletteexecutivesmade thechoiceto build sophisticated,rela
tivelyexpensiveshavingsystemsratherthan fighta low-marginbattlewith
disposables,theydid so inlargepartbecausethey justcouldn'tget excited
about cheap disposablerazors. "Zeien talks about shaving systems with
the sort oftechnicalgusto one expects from a Boeing or Hughes engi
neer," wrote one journalist about Gillette's CEO in 1996.28 Gillette has
always been at its best when it sticks to businessesthat fit its Hedgehogno ]im Collins
Concept. "Peoplewho aren't passionateabout Gilletteneed not apply,"
wrote a Wall StreetJournal reporter,who went on todescribehow a top
business school graduatewasn't hired because she didn't show enough
passionfor deodorant.29
Perhaps you, too, can't get passionateabout deodorant. Perhaps you
mightfind it hardto imaginebeingpassionateaboutpharmacies,grocery
stores,tobacco,or postagemeters.You might wonderaboutwhat type of
persongets all jazzedupaboutmakinga bankas efficientas McDonald's,
or who considersa diapercharismatic.In the end, it doesn'treallymatter.
The pointis thatthey felt passionateaboutwhat they were doingand the
passionwas deep and genuine.
This doesn't mean,however,that you have to be passionateabout the
mechanicsof the businessper se (althoughyou might be). The passion
circlecan befocused equallyon what the companystandsfor. Forexam
ple, the Fannie Mae people were not passionateabout the mechanical
process of packaging mortgages into market securities. But they were
terrificallymotivatedby the whole idea of helpingpeople of allclasses,
backgrounds,and racesrealizethe Americandreamofowningtheirhome.
LindaKnight,who joinedFannieMae in 1983, justas thecompanyfaced
its darkestdays, told us: "This wasn't justany old companygetting into
trouble;thiswas a companyat thecore ofmakinghomeownershipa real
ity for thousandsofAmericans.It's a role thatis far more importantthan
justmakingmoney,andthat'swhy we felt such depth ofcommitmentto
preserve,protect,and enhancethe company."30As anotherFannie Mae
executivesummedup,"I see usas a key mechanismfor strengtheningthe
whole socialfabric ofAmerica.WheneverI drive throughdifficultneigh
borhoodsthatare comingbackbecausemore familiesown theirhomes,I
return to work reenergized."
THE TRIUMPH OF UNDERSTANDING
OVER BRAVADO
On theresearchteam,we frequentlyfound ourselvestalkingaboutthe dif
ference between "prehedgehog"and "posthedgehog"states. In the pre-
hedgehogstate, it's like gropingthroughthe fog. You're makingprogress
on along march, but you can'tsee all that well. At each juncturein the
trail, you can only see a little bit ahead and must move at a deliberate,
slow crawl.Then, with the HedgehogConcept,you breakintoa clearing,Good to Great 111
the fog lifts, and you can see for miles. From then on, each juncture
requires less deliberation, and you can shiftfromcrawl to walk, and from
walk to run. In theposthedgehogstate,miles oftrail move swiftlybeneath
your feet, forks in the road fly pastasyou quicklymake decisionsthat you
couldnot have seenso clearlyin thefog.
What'sso strikingaboutthecomparisoncompaniesis that—forall their
change programs, frantic gesticulations,and charismaticleaders—they
rarelyemergedfrom thefog. Theywould try torun, makingbad decisions
at forks in the road, and thenhave to reversecourselater. Or they would
veer off the trail entirely, banging into trees and tumbling down
ravines.(Oh,but they were sure doing it with speedand panache!)
/r$f& 4h^#pj^^^ *wortel"that had -
^becoiMy^ot^ple and clear to th§ good-to-great companies
'^j|fen^ treasons, First,
Nowhere is this more evident than in the comparison companies'
mindlesspursuitofgrowth:Over two thirdsofthe comparisoncompanies
displayedan obsession with growth without the benefitof a Hedgehog
Concept.31Statementssuch as "We've been a growth at any price com
pany" and "Bettingthat size equals success"pepperthe materialson the
comparisoncompanies.In contrast,not one of thegood-to-greatcompa
nies focused obsessivelyon growth.Yet they createdsustained,profitable
growthfar greaterthanthe comparisoncompaniesthatmade growththeir
mantra.
Consider the case of Great Western and Fannie Mae. "Great Western is
a mite unwieldy," wrote the Wall Street Transcript "It wants to grow
everywayit can."32 The companyfound itselfin finance, leasing, insur
ance, and manufacturedhouses, continuallyacquiringcompaniesin an
expansionbinge.33 Bigger! More! In 1985, GreatWestern'sCEO told a
gatheringof analysts,"Don't worry about what you call us—a bank, an
S&L, or a Zebra."34
Quite a contrastto Fannie Mae, whichhad asimple,crystallineunder
standing that it could be the best capital markets player in anything112 Jim Collins
relatedto mortgages,bettereven than GoldmanSachsor SalomonBroth
ers in openingup thefull capitalmarketsto themortgageprocess.It built
a powerful economic machine by reframingits business model on risk
management,rather than mortgage selling. And it drove the machine
with great passion, the Fannie Mae people inspired by its vital role in
democratizinghome ownership.
Until 1984,the stockchartstrackedeach otherlikemirror images.Then
in 1984, one year after it clarified its Hedgehog Concept, Fannie Mae
explodedupward, while GreatWesternkept lollygaggingalong until just
before its acquisitionin 1997. By focusingon its simple,elegantconcep
tion—and not just focusing on "growth"—FannieMae grew revenues
nearlythreefoldfrom its transitionyear in 1984through1996. GreatWest
ern, for all ofits gobblingofgrowth steroids,grew revenuesand earnings
only 25 percentoverthe same period,thenlost its independencein 1997.
The HedgehogConceptis a turningpointin the journeyfrom good
to great. In most cases, the transitiondate follows within a few years of
the HedgehogConcept. Furthermore,everythingfrom here on out in
the book hinges upon havingthe HedgehogConcept.As will become
abundantly clear in the following chapters, disciplined action—the
third big chunk in the framework after disciplinedpeople and disci
plined thought—onlymakes sense in the context of the Hedgehog
Concept.
Despiteits vital importance(or, rather,becauseofits vital importance),
it would be a terriblemistaketo thoughtlesslyattemptto jump rightto a
Hedgehog Concept. You can't just go off-site for two days, pull out a
bunch offlip charts,do breakoutdiscussions,and come up with a deep
understanding.Well,you can do that, butyou probablywon'tgetit right.
It wouldbe likeEinstein saying,"I think it'stime to become a greatscien
tist, so I'm going to go offto theFour Seasonsthis weekend,pull out the
flip charts, and unlock the secrets of the universe."Insight just doesn'tGood to Great 113
Fannie Mae, Great Western, and the General Market
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1970-1984
$10
1970 1977
Notes:
1. Shows cumulative value of $1 invested December 31,1970 -
2. Dividends reinvested.
January 1,1984.
General Market:
$3.56
Great Western:
$2.35
Fannie Mae:
$1.77
1984
Fannie Mae, Great Western, and the General Market
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1984-2000
$80
1984 1992
Notes:
1. Fannie Mae transition point occurred in 1984.
2. Cumulativevalue of $1 invested December31,1984 - January 1, 2000.
3. Dividends reinvested.
Fannie Mae: $64.17
General Market:
$11.53
2000114 Jim Collins
happen that way. It took Einsteinten years of gropingthrough the fog to
getthe theoryofspecialrelativity,andhe was a brightguy.35
It took aboutfour years on averagefor the good-to-greatcompanies to
clarify their Hedgehog Concepts. Like scientific insight, a Hedgehog
Concept simplifiesa complexworld and makes decisionsmuch easier.
But whileit hascrystallineclarityand elegantsimplicityonce you haveit,
gettingthe conceptcan be devilishlydifficultand takes time. Recognize
that gettinga HedgehogConceptis an inherentlyiterativeprocess,not an
event.
The essenceofthe processistogetthe right peopleengagedin vigorous
dialogueanddebate,infusedwith thebrutalfacts andguidedbyquestions
formed bythe three circles.Do we really understandwhat we can be the
best in the world at, as distinct from what we can just be successfulat? Do
we really understandthe drivers in our economicengine, includingour
economic denominator?Do we really understandwhat best ignites our
passion?
One particularlyuseful mechanismfor moving the processalong is a
Ask Questions,
Guided by the Three Circles
r
Autopsiesand Analysis, THE Dialogueand Debate,
Guidedby r* Guidedby
the Three Cirlces COUNCIL the Three Circles
J
Executive Decisions,
Guided by the Three Circles
Getting the Hedgehog Concept
An Iterative ProcessGood to Great 115
device that we came to call the Council. The Council consistsof a group
of the right people whoparticipatein dialogue and debate guided by the
three circles,iterativelyand overtime, about vitalissuesand decisionsfac
ing the organization. (See"Characteristicsof the Council," below.)
In response to the question, "How should we go about getting our
HedgehogConcept?" I would point to thediagramon page 114and say:
"Build the Council, and use that as a model. Ask the right questions,
engage in vigorous debate, make decisions, autopsy the results, and
learn—allguided within thecontextof the three circles.Just keep going
through thatcycle of understanding."
When asked,"Howdo weacceleratethe processofgettinga Hedgehog
Concept?"I wouldrespond:"Increasethe number oftimesyougoaround
that full cycle in a given period of time." If you go through this cycle
enough times, guided resolutelyby the three circles,you will eventually
gainthe depth ofunderstandingrequiredfor a HedgehogConcept. Itwill
not happen overnight,but it will eventuallyhappen.
Characteristics of the Council
1♦ The councilexistsas adevicetogain understandingaboutjifipor-
„,-/.' tanf!issuesfacingtheorganization.
%TheCouncilis asbembleciand used by the leadingexecutiveand
; usuallyqdo^istsoffive to twelvep
& Each Council member has the ability to argue and debate in
, ,; search of understanding, not from the egoistic need to win a point
;f or protecta parochialinterest
4 E$ch'Pound) member retain^ the respect of every other Council
.;' member, v^/fftoui[exception.
. ;$; Council members corne from a range of perspectives, but each
, memberhas deep knowledgeaboutsome aspecto^ the organiza-
/ tiqa^nd/or the environmentinwhich itoperates. , /
& The Council includeskey membersof the managementteam but
: , ;/ is not limited to member^ of the managementtean\ npr is every
executiveautomaticallya member.
;7NTheCauncil is a standingbody, not an ad hoc committeeassem-
*;^bledfora specificproject. ,/
,.4;Thepbtiiicil $eet$ pSriqdically,as much as once"a week or as
/; infrequentlyas once per quarter116 Jim Collins
:9, The,Goju$cil?does notseel^on^ejis^^ cppsen-
sus/decisionsiare ptten at: odds;with inyitdeht decisions.The
responsibilityfor the JfnaWe^sipn ^rrfajris .with, the leveling.
\<, executive;, *»;?'''** -:^: '-V'^ s \ / ^ '~N»'< "V* ' (V.. -
*10, Jhe;PouocHtsan informalbod^/n^/listedjpn.anyformalorganiza
tion ch%rtor in any formaldocuments, r *- . > '* ;V
31. The Council c^rhhave&r^gp ^fe^sible' narpesvxf^uaHyquite
- innocuous^In the 0o&to$mst complniesi they Ma^l benign
names like LongH^ange profit ImprovementCommitte%pp^o-
rate ProductsCommittee,(StfategifcThirikingGrou$and Executive
': Council.'.. - ' V-- X„v »•#"'-*. ;'. x\ ' :-r '.'-v-
Does every organizationhave a Hedgehog Concept to discover?What
if you wake up, look around with brutal honesty, and conclude: "We're
not the best at anything,and we neverhavebeen." Therein lies one of the
mostexcitingaspectsofthe entirestudy.In themajorityofcases,the good-
to-greatcompanieswere not the bestin theworld at anythingand showed
no prospectsof becoming so.Infusedwith the StockdaleParadox("There
must be something we can become the best at, and we will find it! We
must also confront the brutal facts of what we cannot be the best at, and
we will not delude ourselves!"),every good-to-greatcompany, no matter
howawfulat the startofthe process,prevailedin itssearchfora Hedgehog
Concept.
As you searchfor your own concept,keep in mind that when thegood-
to-greatcompaniesfinallygraspedtheir HedgehogConcept, it had none
ofthe tiresome,irritatingblastsofmindlessbravadotypicalofthe compar
ison companies. "Yep, we could be the best at that" was stated as the
recognitionof a fact, no more startlingthan observingthat the sky is blue
or the grass is green. When you get yourHedgehogConcept right, it has
the quiet pingoftruth, likea single,clear,perfectlystrucknote hangingin
the air in the hushed silence of a full auditorium at the end of a quiet
movement of a Mozart pianoconcerto.There is no need to say much of
anything;the quiet truth speaksfor itself.
Fm reminded ofa personalexperiencein myown familythat illustrates
the vitaldifferencebetweenbravadoand understanding.Mywife,Joanne,
began racing marathons andtriathlonsin the early1980s.As she accumu
latedexperience—tracktimes,swim splits,raceresults—shebeganto feelGood to Great 117
the momentum of success. One day, she entered a race with many of the
best woman triathletes in the world,and—despite a weakswim where she
came out of the water hundreds of places behind the top swimmersand
having to push a heavy, nonaerodynamicbike up a long hill—she man
aged tocross the finish line in the top ten.
Then, a few weeks later while sitting at breakfast,Joanne looked up
from her morning newspaper and calmly, quietly said, "I think I could
win the Ironman."
The Ironman, the worldchampionship of triathlons, involves2.4 miles
of oceanswimmingand 112 miles ofcycling,capped offwith a26.2-mile
marathon footrace on the hot, lava-baked Kona coast of Hawaii.
"Of course, I'd have to quit my job, turn down my offers to graduate
school (shehad been admittedto graduatebusinessschoolat a number of
the top schools),and commit tofull-timetraining.But..."
Her words had no bravadoin them, nohype, no agitation,no pleading.
She didn't tryto convinceme. She simplyobservedwhatshe had come to
understand was a fact, a truth no moreshockingthan statingthat the walls
were painted white. She had thepassion.She had the genetics.And if she
wonraces,she'd havethe economics.The goal to winthe Ironmanflowed
from earlyunderstandingof herHedgehogConcept.
And, so, she decided to go for it. She quit her job. She turned down
graduate schools. She sold the mills! (But she did keep me on her bus.)
And threeyears later, on a hot October dayin1985,she crossedthe finish
line at the HawaiiIronman in first place,world champion. When Joanne
set out to win the Ironman, she did not know if she would become the
world's best triathlete. But she understood that she could, that it was in the
realm ofpossibility,that shewas not livingin a delusion.And that distinc
tion makes all the difference.It is adistinctionthat those who want to go
from good to great must grasp, and one that those who fail to become
great so often never do.H EDO E H 0 Q 0 O NC E P T
( S I W P II C I T Y WITHIN T H E T H R E E C I R C L E $-);
. *:"? "',«;.' ' ', KEY-POINTS • '''  /* :
• To gofrom good to great requiresa deep un<Jerstan4^go£ three
intersectingcirclestranslatedintoa simple,crystallineconcept(the
HedgehogConcepit): ;:
What you are deeply
passionate about
What you can T^^* ^^1 What drives
bethbbestin \ / YOUR
THE WORLDAT \ / ECONOMIC
/ ENGINE
Three Circles of the Hedgehog Concept
The keyisto understandwhatyourorganizationcan be the best in
the worldat,and equallyimportantwhat it cannotbe thebestat—
notwhatit 'wants"to be the bestat The HedgehogConceptisnot
a goal,strategy,or intention;it isan understanding.
Ifyoucannotbe the bestin theworldat yourconsbusiness,then your
corebusinesscannotform thebasisofyourHedgehogConcept
The "bestin the world"understandingisa much more severestan
dard than a corecompetence.You mighthave 3 competencebut
notnecessarilyhavethecapacitytobe trulythebestiri theworldatGood to Great 119
that competence.Conversely,there may be activitiesat which you
could become the best in theworld,but at which you have no cur
rent competence.
• To getinsightintothe driversofyour economicengine,searchfor
the onedenominator(profitperx or, in thesocialsector,cashflow
per x) that has thesinglegreatestimpact.
• Oc)od-to-gr#tcompanies set their goals and strategiesbased on
understanding;comparisoncompaniessettheirgoalsand strategies
^ based on bravado.
• Gettingthe HedgehogConceptis an iterativeprocess.The Coun
cil can be a useful device.
UNEXPECTED FINDINGS
• The good-to-greatcompaniesare more like hedgehogs—simple,
dowdycreaturesthatknow"onebig thing"and stickto it The com
parisoncompaniesare more like foxes—crafty,cunning creatures
that knowmanythingsyetlack consistency.
• It tookfour years on averageforthe good-to-greatcompanies to get
a HedgehogConcept
• Strategyper se did not separatethe good-to-greatcompaniesfrom
the comparisoncompanies.Bothsets had strategies,and there is no
evidence that the good-to-greatcompanies spent more time on
strategicplanningthan the comparisoncompanies.
• You absolutelydo not need to be in a greatindustryto producesus
tainedgreatresults.No matterhow bad theindustry,everygood-to-
greatcompanyfiguredouthow toproducetrulysuperioreconomic
returns.C H A P T E R
Level5 First Who. .. Confront the Hedgehog |
Leadership Then What Brutal Facts Concept
Technology
Accelerators
Freedom is onlypart ofthestoryand halfthe truth.... That
iswhy I recommendthat theStatueofLibertyon the East
Coastbe supplantedbya StatueofResponsibilityon the West
Coast.
—Viktor E. Frankl,
Man's Search for Meaning1
in 1980, George Rathmann cofounded the biotechnologycompany
Amgen. Over the next twentyyears,Amgen grew from a strugglingentre
preneurialenterpriseinto a $3.2 billioncompanywith 6,400 employees,
creatingblood productsto improvethe lives of peoplesufferingthrough
chemotherapyand kidney dialysis.2 Under Rathmann,Amgen became
one of the few biotechnologycompaniesthat deliveredconsistentprof
itabilityand growth. It became so consistentlyprofitable,in fact, that its
stockpricemultipliedover 150 timesfrom its publicofferingin June1983
toJanuary2000.Aninvestorwho boughtas littleas$7,000ofAmgenstock
wouldhave realizeda capitalgainof over$1 million,thirteen timesbetter
than the sameinvestmentin the generalstockmarket.
Few successfulstart-upsbecomegreatcompanies,in largepartbecauseGood to Great 121
they respond to growth and success in the wrong way. Entrepreneurial
success is fueled by creativity,imagination,bold moves into uncharted
waters, and visionaryzeal. As a companygrows and becomes more com
plex, it begins to trip over its own success—toomany new people, too
many new customers, too many new orders, too many new products.
Whatwas once greatfun becomesan unwieldyballof disorganizedstuff.
Lack of planning,lack of accounting,lack of systems,and lack of hiring
constraints create friction. Problems surface—with customers, with cash
flow, with schedules.
In response,someone(oftena boardmember)says, "It'stime togrow up.
Thisplace needssome professionalmanagement."The companybeginsto
hire MBAs and seasonedexecutivesfrom blue-chipcompanies.Processes,
procedures,checklists,and allthe rest begintosproutup like weeds.What
was once an egalitarian environment gets replaced with a hierarchy.
Chains of command appear for the first time. Reporting relationships
become clear, and an executiveclass with specialperks begins to appear.
"We" and "they"segmentationsappear—justlike in a real company.
The professionalmanagersfinally rein in the mess. They create order
out ofchaos,but theyalso kill the entrepreneurialspirit.Membersof the
founding team begin to grumble,"This isn't fun anymore. I used to be
able to justgetthingsdone. Now I have to fill out these stupidforms and
follow these stupid rules. Worst of all, I have to spend a horrendous
amount of time inuseless meetings."The creativemagic begins to wane
assome ofthe most innovativepeopleleave,disgustedbythe burgeoning
bureaucracyand hierarchy. The exciting start-up transforms into just
another company,with nothingspecialto recommendit. The cancer of
mediocritybeginsto grow in earnest.
GeorgeRathmannavoidedthisentrepreneurialdeath spiral.He under
stoodthat thepurposeofbureaucracyisto compensatefor incompetence
and lack of discipline—aproblemthat largelygoes away if you have the
right people in the first place. Most companiesbuild their bureaucratic
rules to managethe small percentageofwrong peopleon the bus,which
in turn drivesaway the right people on the bus, which thenincreasesthe
percentage of wrong people on the bus, which increases the need for
more bureaucracyto compensatefor incompetence and lack of disci-*
pline, which then furtherdrivesthe rightpeopleaway, and soforth. Rath
mann also understood an alternative exists: Avoid bureaucracy and
hierarchyand insteadcreatea cultureofdiscipline.When you put these
two complementaryforces together—aculture ofdisciplinewith an ethic122 Jim Collins
of entrepreneurship—youget amagicalalchemyofsuperiorperformance
and sustained results.
The Good-to-Great Matrix of Creative Discipline
Hierarchical
Organization
Great
Organization
Bureaucratic
Organization
Start-up
Organization
Low Ethic of
Entrepreneurship
High
High
Culture of
Discipline
Low
Why start this chapterwith a biotechnologyentrepreneur rather than
one of ourgood-to-greatcompanies?BecauseRathmanncreditsmuch of
his entrepreneurial success to what he learned while working at Abbott
LaboratoriesbeforefoundingAmgen:
WhatI gotfrom Abbottwas the idea thatwhenyou setyourobjectivesfor
the year, you record them in concrete. You can change your plans
through the year, but you never change what you measure yourself
against.You are rigorousat the end oftheyear, adheringexactlyto what
yousaid was goingto happen.You don't geta chance toeditorialize.You
don'tgeta chanceto adjustand finagle,and decidethatyou reallydidn't
intend to do that anyway, and readjustyour objectivesto make yourself
look better. You never just focus on what you've accomplished for the
year; youfocus on whatyou'veaccomplishedrelativeto exactlywhatyou
said you weregoingto accomplish—nomatter how tough themeasure.
Thatwas a disciplinelearnedatAbbott,andthat we carriedintoAmgen.3Good to Great 123
Many of the Abbott disciplinestrace back to 1968, when it hired a
remarkable financial officer named Bernard H. Semler. Semler did not see
his job as a traditional financial controller oraccountant Rather, he set out
to inventmechanismsthat woulddriveculturalchange. He createda whole
new framework of accounting that he called ResponsibilityAccounting,
whereineveryitem ofcost, income,and investmentwouldbe clearlyidenti
fied with a singleindividualresponsiblefor thatitem.4The idea, radicalfor
the 1960s,was to createa systemwhereineveryAbbottmanagerin everytype
of job was responsiblefor his or her return on investment,with the same
rigorthat aninvestorholdsan entrepreneurresponsible.There wouldbe no
hiding behindtraditionalaccountingallocations,no sloppingfunds about
to coverup ineffectivemanagement,no opportunitiesfor finger-pointing.5
But the beautyof theAbbottsystemlaynot justin its rigor,but in how it
used rigor and discipline to enable creativity and entrepreneurship.
"Abbottdevelopeda very disciplinedorganization,but not in a linear way
of thinking,"said George Rathmann."[It] was exemplaryat having both
financial discipline and the divergentthinking ofcreativework. We used
financial discipline as a way to provide resources for the really creative
work."6Abbott reduced its administrativecosts as a percentageof sales to
the lowest in the industry (by a significantmargin) and at the same time
became a new productinnovationmachine like 3M,derivingup to 65 per
cent ofrevenuesfrom newproductsintroducedin thepreviousfouryears.7
This creativedualityran through everyaspectofAbbottduring the tran
sition era, woven into the veryfabric of the corporate culture. On the one
hand, Abbottrecruited entrepreneurial leadersand gave them freedom to
determine the best path to achievingtheir objectives.On the other hand,
individualshad to commit fully to the Abbottsystemand were held rigor
ously accountable for their objectives.They had freedom, but freedom
within a framework. Abbott instilled the entrepreneur's zeal for oppor
tunistic flexibility.("We recognized that planning is priceless, but plans
are useless," said one Abbott executive.)8But Abbott also had the disci
pline to say no to opportunities that failed the three circles test. While
encouraging wide-ranginginnovationwithin its divisions,Abbott simulta
neouslymaintained fanaticaladherence to its HedgehogConcept of con
tributing to cost-effectivehealth care.
AbbottLaboratoriesexemplifiesa key findingofour study: a cultureof 1
discipline.Byitsnature, "culture" isa somewhatunwieldytopic to discuss,
less prone to clean frameworkslike the three circles. The main points of
this chapter, however,boil down to one central idea:Builda culturefull of124 Jim Collins
peoplewho take disciplinedactionwithin the three circles,fanaticallycon
sistentwith the HedgehogConcept
More precisely,this means thefollowing:
1. Builda culture around the idea offreedomand responsibility,within a
framework.
2. Fill that culture with self-disciplinedpeople who are willingto go to
extreme lengths to fulfill their responsibilities.They will "rinse their
cottagecheese."
3. Don't confusea culture ofdisciplinewith atyrannicaldisciplinarian.
4. Adherewithgreat consistencyto theHedgehogConcept, exercisingan
almost religiousfocus on the intersectionof the three circles. Equally
important,createa "stopdoinglist"and systematicallyunplug anything
extraneous.
FREEDOM (AND RESPONSIBILITY)
WITHIN A FRAMEWORK
Picturean airline pilot.She settlesintothe cockpit,surroundedby dozens
of complicated switchesand sophisticatedgauges, sitting atop a massive
$84millionpieceof machinery.As passengersthump and stufftheirbags
into overheadbins and flight attendantsscurryabout trying to get every
one settledin, she beginsher preflightchecklist.Step by methodical step,
she systematicallymoves through everyrequired item.
Cleared for departure, she begins working with air traffic control, fol
lowingpreciseinstructions-—whichdirectionto takeout ofthe gate,which
way to taxi, which runwayto use, which direction to takeoff. She doesn't
throttle up and hurtle the jet into the air until she's cleared for takeoff.
Once aloft,she communicates continuallywithflight-controlcenters and
stays within the tightboundariesofthe commercialair trafficsystem.
On approach,however,she hitsa ferociousthunder-and-hailstorm.Blast
ing winds, crosswaysand unpredictable,tilt thewings downto the left, then
down tothe right.Lookingoutthe windows,passengerscan'tseethe ground,
onlythe thinningand thickeningglobs ofgray cloudsand the spatterof rain
on the windows.The flight attendantsannounce, "Ladiesand gentlemen,
we'vebeen askedto remainseatedforthe remainderofthe flight.Pleaseput
yourseatsin theuprightand lockedpositionand placeallyourcarry-onbag
gage under the seatin frontofyou. Weshouldbe on the ground shortly."Good to Great 125
"Not tooshortly, I hope," think the lessexperienced travelers, unnerved
by the roiling wind and momentary flashes of lightning. But the experi
enced travelersjustgo on readingmagazines,chatting withseatmates,and
preparing for their meetings on the ground. "I've been through all this
before," they think. "She'll only land if it's safe."
Sure enough, on finalapproach—wheelsdown as a quarter of a million
pounds of steelglides down at 130miles per hour—passengerssuddenly
hear the engines whine and feel themselvesthrust back into their seats.
The plane acceleratesback into thesky. It banks around in a big arc back
toward the airport. The pilot takes a moment to click on the intercom:
"Sorry,folks. We were gettingsome badcrosswindsthere. We're going to
give it another try." On the next go, the winds calm just enough and she
bringsthe plane down, safely.
Now take a step back and think about the model here. The pilot oper
ates within avery strictsystem,and she does not have freedom to go out
side of thatsystem. (You don't wantairline pilotssaying,"Hey, I just read
in a management bookabout thevalue ofbeing empowered—freedomto
experiment, to be creative, to be entrepreneurial, to try a lot of stuff and
keep what works!")Yetat the same time, the crucial decisions—whether
to take off, whether to land, whether to abort, whether to land else
where—restwith the pilot Regardlessof the stricturesof the system,one
central factstandsout above all others:The pilot has ultimateresponsibil
ityfor the airplane and the lives of the people on it.
The point here is not that a companyshould have asystemas strictand
inflexibleas the airtrafficsystem.Afterall, ifa corporatesystemfails, peo
ple don't die by the hundreds in burning, twisted hunks of steel. Cus
tomer serviceat the airlines might be terrible, but you are almost certain
to get whereyou aregoing in one piece.The point of thisanalogyis that
when welookedinsidethe good-to-greatcompanies,wewerereminded of
the best part of the airline pilotmodel: freedomand responsibilitywithin
the frameworkof a highlydevelopedsystem.
^fftfei^c^drtprgreatcompaniesftutttaConsistentsystemwith,clearcon-
4sjbBints4IbutIheyalso gave>.peoplefreedom and responsibilitywithin
/?Jteiframevyo/kpfethatsyste^ Tt(%hired.self-disciplinedpeoplewho.
- ^drtt.rieedto-be managed,'and tfe&n managedthe system,:notthe126 Jim Collins
"Thiswas the secretto how we were able to runstoresfrom a greatdis
tance, by remotecontrol,"saidBill Rivas of CircuitCity. "It was the com
bination of greatstore managerswho had ultimate responsibilityfor their
individualstores,operatingwithina greatsystem.You've gotto have man
agement and people who believe in the system and who do whatever is
necessaryto make thesystemwork. But within the boundariesof that sys
tem, store managershad a lot ofleeway,to coincidewith theirresponsibil
ity."9 In a sense, CircuitCity became to consumerelectronicsretailing
what McDonald's became to restaurants—notthe most exquisiteexperi
ence, but an enormouslyconsistentone. The systemevolvedover time as
Circuit City experimentedbyadding new itemslike computers and video
players(justlike McDonald's addedbreakfastEggMcMuffins).But at any
given moment, everyone operated within the frameworkof the system.
"That's one of the major differences between us and all the others who
were in this same businessin the early 1980s,"said Bill Zierden. "They
justcouldn't roll it out further, and wecould.We could stamp thesestores
out allover the country,with greatconsistency."10Therein liesone ofthe
keyreasonswhyCircuit City tookoffin the early 1980sand beat the gen
eral stockmarket by more than eighteen times overthe nextfifteenyears.
In a sense,much of this bookisabout creatinga culture of discipline. It
all startswithdisciplinedpeople.The transitionbeginsnot bytryingto dis
cipline the wrong people into the right behaviors,but by getting self-
disciplinedpeople on the bus in the first place. Next we have disciplined
thought. You need the discipline to confront the brutal facts of reality,
while retainingresolutefaith that you can andwill create a path to great
ness. Most importantly,you need the disciplineto persistin the search for
understanding until you get your HedgehogConcept. Finally, we have
disciplined action, the primary subject of this chapter. This order is
important. The comparisoncompaniesoften tried to jump right to disci
plined action. But disciplined action without self-disciplinedpeople is
impossibleto sustain,and disciplinedaction withoutdisciplinedthought
is a recipe fordisaster.
Indeed, discipline by itself will not produce great results. We find
plentyof organizationsin historythat hadtremendousdisciplineand that
marched rightinto disaster,withprecisionand in nicelyformedlines. No,
the point is tofirstget self-disciplinedpeople who engage invery rigorous
thinking,who then take disciplinedactionwithinthe frameworkofa con
sistentsystemdesignedaround the HedgehogConcept.Good to Great 127
RINSING YOUR COTTAGE CHEESE
Throughoutour research,we were struckby the continualuse ofwords
like disciplined,rigorous, dogged, determined,diligent,precise, fastidious,
systematic, methodical, workmanlike, demanding, consistent, focused,
accountable, and responsible. They peppered articles, interviews, and
source materials on the good-to-greatcompanies, and were strikingly
absentfrom the materialson the directcomparisoncompanies.Peoplein
thegood-to-greatcompaniesbecamesomewhatextremein thefulfillment
oftheir responsibilities,borderingin some cases on fanaticism.
Wecameto callthisthe "rinsingyour cottagecheese"factor.The anal
ogy comesfrom a disciplinedworld-classathletenamed Dave Scott,who
wonthe HawaiiIronmanTriathlon six times.In training,Scottwouldride
his bike 75 miles, swim 20,000 meters, and run 17 miles—on average,
every single day. Dave Scott did not have a weight problem! Yet he
believedthat a low-fat, high-carbohydratediet would give him an extra
edge. So, Dave Scott—a man who burned at least 5,000 caloriesa day
in training—wouldliterallyrinse his cottage cheese to get the extra fat
off. Now, there is no evidence that he absolutely needed to rinse his
cottagecheese to win the Ironman;that's not the pointof thestory. The
point is that rinsing his cottage cheese was simply one more small step
that he believed would make him just that much better, one more small
step added to all the other small steps to create a consistent program
ofsuperdiscipline.I've always picturedDave Scott runningthe 26 miles
ofthe marathon—hammeringaway in hundred-degreeheat on theblack,
baked lavafields of the Kona coastafterswimming2.4 miles in the ocean
and cycling 112 miles against ferocious crosswinds—andthinking to128 Jim Collins
himself:"Comparedto rinsingmy cottagecheeseeveryday, this just isn't
that bad."
I realizethatit'sa bizarreanalogy.Butina sense,thegood-to-greatcom
panies became like Dave Scott. Much of theanswer to the questionof
"goodto great"liesin the disciplineto dowhateverit takes to become the
best withincarefullyselectedarenasand then toseek continualimprove
mentfrom there.It's reallyjustthatsimple.And it's reallyjustthatdifficult.
ConsiderWells Fargo in contrastto Bank of America. Carl Reichardt
neverdoubtedthatWellsFargocouldemergefrom bankderegulationas a
strongercompany,not aweakerone. He saw that thekey to becominga
greatcompanyrested not with brilliantnewstrategiesbut with the sheer
determinationto rip a hundredyears of banker mentalityout of thesys
tem. "There'stoo muchwaste inbanking,"said Reichardt."Gettingridof
it takes tenacity,not brilliance."11
Reichardtseta cleartoneatthe top: We'renotgoingtoask everyoneelse
tosufferwhilewe sitonhigh.We willstartby rinsingourown cottagecheese,
righthere in theexecutivesuite. He froze executivesalariesfor two years
(despitethefactthatWellsFargowas enjoyingsome ofthe mostprofitable
years in its history).12He shut the executivediningroom and replacedit
witha collegedormfood-servicecaterer.13He closedthe executiveelevator,
sold the corporatejets,andbannedgreenplantsfrom the executivesuiteas
too expensiveto water.14He removedfreecoffeefrom the executivesuite.
HeeliminatedChristmastreesfor management.15Hethrewreportsbackat
peoplewho'd submittedthem in fancy binders,with the admonishment:
"Wouldyou spend your own moneythis way? Whatdoes a binderadd to
anything?"16Reichardtwouldsitthroughmeetingswith fellowexecutives,
in abeat-upold chairwith the stuffinghangingout. Sometimeshe would
justsitthere and pickat the stuffingwhile listeningto proposalsto spend
money,said onearticle,"[and]a lotofmust-doprojectsjustmeltedaway."17
Across the streetat Bank ofAmerica,executivesalso faced deregulation
andrecognizedtheneed toeliminatewaste. However,unlikeWells Fargo,Good to Great 129
B of A executivesdidn't have the disciplineto rinse their own cottage
cheese.Theypreservedtheirposh executivekingdomin its imposingtower
in downtown San Francisco, the CEO's office described in the book
Breakingthe Bank as"a northeastcornersuitewith a largeattachedconfer
ence room,orientalrugs,and floor-to-ceilingwindowsthatoffereda sweep
ing panoramaof the SanFranciscoBay from the Golden Gate to theBay
Bridge."18 (We found no evidence of executive chairs with the stuffing
hanging out.) The elevatormade its last stop at the executivefloor and
descendedall the way to the ground in one quiet whoosh, unfetteredby
the intrusionsof lesserbeings.The vast open space in the executivesuite
made the windows look even taller than they actually were, creating a
sense of floatingabove the fog in an elevatedcityof alieneliteswho ruled
theworldfrom above.19Why rinseourcottagecheesewhen life is so good?
Afterlosing$1.8 billionacrossthreeyears in themid-1980s,B ofAeven
tuallymade the necessarychangesin responseto deregulation(largelyby
hiringex-Wellsexecutives).20Buteven in thedarkestdays, BofA couldnot
bring itselfto get rid of theperks that shieldeditsexecutivesfrom the real
world. Atone board meetingduring Bank ofAmerica'scrisis period,one
member made sensible suggestionslike "Sell the corporate jet." Other
directorslistenedto therecommendations,then passedthem by.21
A CULTURE, NOT A TYRANT
We almostdidn't include this chapter in thebook. On the one hand, the
good-to-greatcompaniesbecame more disciplinedthan the direct com
parison companies, as withWells Fargo in contrast to Bank ofAmerica.
On the other hand, theunsustainedcomparisonsshowedthemselvesto be
justas disciplinedasthe good-to-greatcompanies.
"Based on my analysis,I don'tthink we can putdisciplinein the book
as a finding,"said Eric Hagen, after he completeda specialanalysisunit
lookingat the leadershipculturesacross the companies."It isabsolutely
clear that theunsustainedcomparisonCEOs broughttremendousdisci
plinetotheir companies,andthat is why theygotsuch greatinitialresults.
So, disciplinejustdoesn'tpass musteras a distinguishingvariable."
Curious, we decided to look further into the issue, and Eric undertook
a more in-depth analysis.As we further examined the evidence, it became
clearthat—despitesurfaceappearances—therewas indeeda huge differ
ence betweenthe two sets ofcompaniesin theirapproachto discipline.130 Jim Collins
Consider Ray MacDonald, whotookcommand of Burroughsin 1964.
A brilliant but abrasive man, MacDonald controlled the conversations,
told all the jokes, and criticized those not as smart as he (which was
pretty much everyonearound him). He got things done through sheer
force of personality,using aform of pressurethat came to be known as
"The MacDonald Vise."22 MacDonald produced remarkable results
during hisreign. Everydollarinvestedin 1964,the yearhe became pres
ident, and taken out at the end of 1977, when he retired, produced
returns 6.6 times better than the general market.23 However, the com
pany had no culture of discipline to endure beyond him. After he
retired, his helper minions werefrozen by indecision, leavingthe com
pany, accordingto BusinessWeek, "with an inabilityto doanything."24
Burroughsthen began a long slide, with cumulative returns falling 93
percent belowthe market from the end of the MacDonald era to 2000.
We found a similarstory at Rubbermaidunder StanleyGault. Recall
Burroughs Corporation, a classic Unsustained Transition
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market,
Set to 1.0 at Start of Ray MacDonald Reign
Ray MacDonald Era
Post-Ray MacDonald
1951 1976 2000Good to Great 131
from the Level 5 chapterthat Gault quippedinresponseto theaccusation
ofbeinga tyrant,"Yes, but I'm asinceretyrant."Gault broughtstrictdis
ciplinesto Rubbermaid—rigorousplanningand competitoranalysis,sys
tematic market research, profit analysis,hard-nosed cost control, and so
on. "This is an incrediblydisciplinedorganization,"wrote one analyst.
"Thereis an incrediblethoroughnessin Rubbermaid'sapproachtolife."25
Precise and methodical,Gault arrived at work by 6:30 and routinely
workedeighty-hourweeks, expectinghis managersto do thesame.26
As chiefdisciplinarian,Gaultpersonallyacted as the company'snumber
one qualitycontrolmechanism.Walkingdown the streetin Manhattan,he
noticeda doormanmutteringand swearingas he sweptdirt intoa Rubber
maid dustpan."Stan whirledaround and startinggrillingthe man on why
he was unhappy,"said RichardGates,who told the storyto Fortune. Gault,
convincedthat the lip ofthedustpanwas too thick, promptlyissued a dic
tate to his engineers to redesign the product. "On quality, I'm a sonof-
abitch,"said Gault.His chiefoperatingofficerconcurred:"Hegets livid."27
Rubbermaidrose dramaticallyunder the tyrannyofthis singularlydis
ciplinedleaderbut then just as dramaticallydeclinedwhen he departed.
Under Gault, Rubbermaid beat the market 3.6 to 1. AfterGault, Rubber
maid lost 59 percent of its value relative to the market, before being
bought out by Newell.
One particularlyfascinatingexample of the disciplinariansyndrome
was Chryslerunder LeeIacocca,whom BusinessWeek describedsimply
as, "The Man. The Dictator. Lee."28 Iacocca became president of
Chryslerin 1979 and imposed his toweringpersonalityto disciplinethe
organizationinto shape. "Right away I knew the place was in a state of
anarchy[and] neededa dose oforderand discipline—andquick,"wrote
Iacocca of his early days.29 In his first year, he entirelyoverhauledthe
managementstructure,institutedstrictfinancialcontrols,improvedqual
ity control measures, rationalizedthe production schedule, and con
ducted mass layoffs to preservecash.30 "I felt like an Army Surgeon.. . .
We hadtodo radicalsurgery,savingwhatwe could."31In dealingwith the
unions,he said, "Ifyou don't help me out, I'mgoing to blow your brains
out. I'll declare bankruptcy in the morning, and you'll all be out of
work."32 Iacocca producedspectacularresults and Chryslerbecame one
ofthe most celebratedturnaroundsin industrialhistory.
About midway through his tenure, however, Iacocca seemed to lose
focus and thecompanybegantodeclineonce again.The Wall StreetJour
nalwrote: "Mr. Iacoccaheadedthe StatueofLibertyrenovation,joineda132 Jim Collins
Rubbermaid Corporation, a Classic Unsustained Transition
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market,
Set to 1.0 at Start of Stanley Gault Reign
Disciplinarian
Ends Reign
Company
Acquired
1960 1980 2000
congressionalcommissionon budgetreductionand wrote a secondbook.
He began a syndicatednewspapercolumn,boughtan Italianvilla where
he startedbottlinghis ownwine and olive oil.... Criticscontend it all dis
tracted him, and was a root cause ofChrysler'scurrent problems.... Dis
tractingornot, it's clearthatbeinga folk hero is a demandingsideline."33
Worse than his moonlightcareer as a national hero, his lack of disci
pline to stay within thearenasin whichChryslercould be the best in the
world led to a binge ofhighlyundisciplineddiversifications.In 1985, he
was lured into thesexyaerospacebusiness.WhereasmostCEOs wouldbe
content with a single Gulfstreamjet, Iacocca decided to buy the whole
Gulfstreamcompany!34Also in the mid-1980s,he embarkedon a costly
and ultimately unsuccessfuljoint venture with Italian sports car maker
Maserati. "Iacocca had a softspot for Italians,"said one retired Chrysler
executive. "Iacocca, who owns a modest estate in Tuscany, was sointent
on an Italian alliance that commercial realities were ignored, suggest
industryinsiders,"wrote BusinessWeek.35 Some estimatesput the loss of
the failed Maserativenture at $200 million, which, according to Forbes,
was "an enormoussum tolose on ahigh-price,low-volumeroadster.After
all, no more than afew thousand will everbe built."36
Duringthe firsthalfofhis tenure,Iacoccaproducedremarkableresults,
takingthe companyfrom near bankruptcyto nearlythree times the gen
eral market.During the secondhalfof Iacocca'stenure, the companyslidGood to Great 133
31 percentbehindthe marketand faced anotherpotentialbankruptcy.37
"Like so many patientswith a heart condition,"wrote a Chryslerexecu
tive, "we'd survived surgery several years before only to revert to our
unhealthylifestyle."38
The above cases illustratea patternwe found inevery unsustainedcom
parison:a spectacularrise under a tyrannicaldisciplinarian,followed by
an equally spectaculardecline when the disciplinarianstepped away,
leavingbehindnoenduringcultureofdiscipline,orwhen thedisciplinar
ian himselfbecameundisciplinedandstrayedwantonlyoutsidethe three
circles.Yes, disciplineis essentialfor great results,butdisciplinedaction
without disciplinedunderstandingof the three circles cannot produce
sustainedgreat results.
FANATICAL ADHERENCE TO
THE HEDGEHOG CONCEPT
For nearlyforty years, PitneyBowes lived insidethe warm and protective
cocoonofa monopoly.With its close relationshipto the U.S. Postal Ser
vice and its patentson postagemeter machines,Pitneyattained100 per
centofthe meteredmail market.39By theend ofthe 1950s,nearlyhalfof
all U.S. mail passed throughPitneyBowes machines.40With gross profit
margins in excess of 80percent,no competition,a huge market, and a
recession-proofbusiness,PitneyBoweswasn'tso muchagreatcompanyas
it was a companywith a greatmonopoly.
Then, as almost always happens to monopolies when the protective
cocoonis rippedaway, PitneyBowes began a longslide. Firstcame a con
sentdecreethatrequiredPitneyBowesto licenseits patentstocompetitors,
royaltyfree.41 Withinsix years,PitneyBoweshad sixteencompetitors.42Pit
ney fell into a reactionary"ChickenLittle/thesky is falling"diversification
frenzy, throwing cash after ill-fated acquisitions and joint ventures,
includinga $70 millionbloodbath(54 percentofnet stockholders'equity
at the time) from a computer retail foray. In 1973, the company lost
moneyfor thefirst time in its history.Itwas shapingup to bejustanother
typical case of a monopoly-protectedcompany gradually falling apart
onceconfrontedwith the harsh realityofcompetition.
Fortunately,a Level 5 leader named Fred Allen stepped in and asked
hard questionsthat led to deeper understandingof Pitney's role in the
world. Instead of viewing itself as a "postage meter" company, Pitney134 Jim Collins
came to see that it could be the best in the world at servicingthe back
rooms of businesseswithin the broader concept of "messaging."It also
came to see that sophisticatedback-officeproducts,like high-end faxes
andspecializedcopiers,playedrightinto its economicengineofprofitper
customer,buildingoffits extensivesales andservicenetwork.
Allenandhis successor,GeorgeHarvey,instituteda modelofdisciplined
diversification.For example, Pitney eventuallyattained45 percentof the
high-endfax marketfor largecompanies,ahugelyprofitablecashmachine.43
Harvey began a systematicprocess ofinvestmentin new technologiesand
products,such as the Paragonmail processorthatsealsand sendsletters,and
by thelate 1980s, Pitney consistentlyderived over half its revenuesfrom
products introduced in the previous three years.44 Later, Pitney Bowes
became a pioneer at linking backroom machines to the Internet, yet
another opportunityfor disciplineddiversification.The key point is that
everystep ofdiversificationand innovationstayedwithinthe threecircles.
After falling77percentbehindthe marketfrom the consentdecree to
its darkestdays in 1973,PitneyBowes reversedcourse,eventuallyrisingto
over eleventimesthe marketbythe startof 1999. From 1973 to 2000, Pit
ney Bowes outperformedCoca-Cola,3M, Johnson & Johnson, Merck,
Motorola, Procter & Gamble, Hewlett-Packard,Walt Disney, and even
GeneralElectric.Can you thinkofany othercompanythatemergedfrom
the protective comfort of a monopoly cocoon to deliver this level of
results? AT&T didn't. Xerox didn't. Even IBM didn't.
Pitney Bowes illustrateswhat can happen when a companylacks the
disciplineto stay within the three circlesand, conversely,what can hap
pen whenit regainsthat discipline.
In contrast,wefound a lackofdisciplineto staywithinthe three circles
as a key factor in the demise of nearly all the comparisoncompanies.
Every comparisoneither(1) lackedthe disciplineto understandits three
circlesor (2) lackedthe disciplineto staywithinthe threecircles.Good to Great 135
R.J. Reynolds is a classic case. Until the 1960s, R.J. Reynolds had a
simple and clear concept,built around being the besttobaccocompany
in the UnitedStates—apositionit had heldfor at leasttwenty-fiveyears.45
Then in 1964, the SurgeonGeneral'sOffice issued its reportthat linked
cigaretteswith cancer, and R. J. Reynolds began to diversifyaway from
tobaccoas a defensivemeasure.Of course,all tobaccocompaniesbegan
to diversifyat thattime for the same reason,includingPhilipMorris. But
R. J. Reynolds'wanderingsoutsideits three circlesdefiedalllogic.
R. J. Reynoldsspent nearly a third oftotal corporateassets in 1970 to
buy a shippingcontainercompanyand an oil company (Sea-Landand
Aminoil),the idea beingto make moneyby shippingits own oil.46 Okay,
not aterribleideaon its own. Butwhaton earthdid ithave to dowith R. J.
Reynolds'HedgehogConcept?It was a wholly undisciplinedacquisition
that came about in partbecauseSea-Land'sfounderwas a close friend of
R. J. Reynolds'chairman.47
After pouring more than $2 billion intoSea-Land,the total investment
nearly equaled the entire amount of netstockholders'equity.48 Finally,
after years of starvingthe tobaccobusinessto funnelfunds into the sink
ing ship business,RJR acknowledgedfailure and sold Sea-Land.49One
Reynoldsgrandsoncomplained:"Look, these guys are the world'sbest at
makingand sellingtobaccoproducts,butwhat do they know aboutships
oroil? I'mnot worriedaboutthem goingbroke,butthey look like country
boys with too muchcash in theirpockets."50
To be fair, Philip Morris did not have a perfectdiversificationrecord
either,asevidencedbyits failed purchaseof7UP. However,in stark con
trast to R.J. Reynolds, Philip Morris displayed greater discipline in
responseto the 1964 surgeongeneral'sreport. Instead ofabandoningits
Hedgehog Concept, Philip Morris redefined its Hedgehog Concept in
terms of buildingglobal brands in not-so-healthyconsumables(tobacco,
beer, soft drinks,coffee,chocolate,processedcheese,etc.). PhilipMorris'
superiordisciplineto stay within the three circles is one key reason why
the results of thetwo companiesdivergedso dramaticallyafter the 1964
report,despitethefact thatthey both faced theexactsame industryoppor
tunitiesandthreats.From 1964to 1989 (when R. J. Reynoldsdisappeared
from public tradingin aleveragedbuyout),$1 investedin Philip Morris
beat$1 investedin R. J. Reynoldsby over four times.
Few companieshave the disciplineto discovertheir HedgehogCon
cept, much less the disciplineto build consistentlywithin it. Theyfail to
grasp a simple paradox:The more an organizationhas the disciplineto136 Jim Collins
stay within its three circles, the more it will have attractive opportuni
ties for growth. Indeed, a great company is much more likely to die of
indigestionfrom too much opportunitythan starvation from too little.
The challengebecomesnot opportunitycreation,but opportunityselec
tion.
This notion offanaticalconsistencyrelativeto the HedgehogConcept
doesn'tjustconcernthe portfolioofstrategicactivities.It canrelateto the
entireway you manageandbuildan organization.Nucorbuiltits success
around the HedgehogConceptofharnessingcultureand technologyto
produce steel. Central to the Nucor concept was the idea of aligning
worker interestswith managementand shareholderintereststhroughan
egalitarianmeritocracylargely devoid of class distinctions.Wrote Ken
Iverson, in his 1998 bookPlain Talk:
Inequalitystillruns rampantin mostbusinesscorporations.I'm referring
now to hierarchicalinequalitywhich legitimizesand institutionalizes
the principleof"We"vs. "They."... The peopleatthe topofthe corpo
rate hierarchy grant themselves privilege after privilege, flaunt those
privilegesbeforethe menandwomen who do thereal work, then won
der why employeesare unmoved by management'sinvocationsto cut
costs and boost profitability When I think ofthe millionsofdollars
spent by people at the top of themanagementhierarchyon efforts to
motivatepeople who are continuallyput down by that hierarchy,I can
onlyshake my headin wonder.51
When weinterviewedKenIverson,he toldus that nearly100percent of
the successof Nucorwas due to its abilityto translateits simple concept
into disciplinedactionconsistentwith thatconcept.Itgrewintoa $3.5 bil
lion Fortune 500 companywith only fourlayers of management and a
corporateheadquartersstaffoffewer than twenty-fivepeople—executive,
financial,secretarial,the whole shebang—crammedinto a rented office
the size ofa small dentalpractice.52Cheap veneerfurnitureadornedthePassion
for eliminating class
distinctions and creating
an egalitarian meritocracy that
aligns management, labor, and
financial interests
Good to Great 137
Couldbecomethe p* ^T Economic
best in the world at I / denominator of
harnessingculture\ / profitper ton of
and technologyto\ / finished steel
produce low-cost
steel
Nucor's Three Circles
1970-1995
lobby, which itselfwas not muchlargerthan a closet. Insteadof acorpo
rate diningroom, executiveshosted visitingdignitariesat Phil's Diner, a
stripmall sandwichshop acrossthe street.53
Executivesdid not receive better benefits than frontline workers.In fact,
executiveshad fewer perks. For example, all workers (but not executives)
were eligibleto receive$2,000peryear for each childfor up tofour yearsof
post-high school education.54In one incident, a man came to Marvin
Pohlmanand said, "I have ninekids. Are you tellingme thatyou'll pay for
four years ofschool—college,trade school,whatever—forevery singleone
of mykids?" Pohlman acknowledgedthat, yes, that's exactly what would
happen."Theman justsat thereand cried,"said Pohlman."I'llneverforget
it. It justcapturesin one momentsomuch ofwhatwe were tryingto do."55
When Nucor had a highly profitableyear, everyone in the company
wouldhave a very profitableyear. Nucorworkersbecamesowell paid that
one woman told her husband,"If you get fired from Nucor, I'll divorce
you."56 Butwhen Nucor faced difficulttimes, everyonefrom top to bot
tom suffered.But people at the topsufferedmore. In the 1982 recession,
forexample,workerpaywent down 25 percent,officerpaywent down 60
percent, and the CEO's paywentdown 75 percent.57138 Jim Collins
Nucor tookextraordinarysteps to keepat baythe class distinctionsthat
eventuallyencroach on most organizations.All 7,000employees'names
appearedin the annual report, not just officers'and executives'.58Every
one except safety supervisorsand visitorswore the same color hard hats.
The colorofhard hats mightsound trivial,but it causedquite astir. Some
foremen complained that special-coloredhard hats identified them as
higherin the chain,animportantstatussymbolthattheycouldput on the
back shelves of their cars or trucks. Nucor responded by organizing a
series of forums to address the point that your status and authority in
Nucor come from your leadershipcapabilities,not your position. If you
don't likeit-—ifyoureallyfeel you need thatclass distinction—well,then,
Nucoris justnotthe rightplacefor you.59
In contrast to Nucor's dental suite-sized headquarters, Bethlehem
Steelbuilt a twenty-one-storyofficecomplexto house itsexecutivestaff.At
extra expense, it designedthe building more like a cross than a rectan
gle—a design that accommodatedthe large number of vice presidents
who needed corner offices. "The vice presidents... [had to have] win
dows in two directions, so it was out of that desire that we came up with
the design," explained a Bethlehem executive.60In his book Crisis in
Bethlehem,John Strohmeyerdetailsa cultureasfarto the other end ofthe
continuum from Nucor asyoucan imagine.He describesa fleetofcorpo
rate aircraft,used even for takingexecutives'children to collegeand flit
tingaway toweekendhideaways.Hedescribesa world-classeighteen-hole
executivegolf course, an executivecountryclub renovatedwith Bethle
hem corporatefunds, and even how executiverank determinedshower
priorityat theclub.61
We came to the conclusion that Bethlehem executives saw the very
purposeof theiractivitiesas theperpetuationof aclass system that ele
vated them to elite status. Bethlehem did not decline in the 1970s
and 1980s primarily because of imports or technology—Bethlehem
declined first and foremost because it was a culture wherein people
focused their efforts on negotiatingthe nuances of an intricate social
hierarchy, not on customers,competitors,or changes in the external
world.
From 1966 (at the startof itsbuildup) to1999,Nucor postedthirty-four
consecutiveyears ofpositiveprofitability,while over those same thirty-four
years, Bethlehemlost moneytwelvetimes and its cumulativeprofitability
added up to less than zero. By the 1990s, Nucor'sprofitabilitybeat Beth
lehem's every single year, and at the end of the century,Nucor—whichGood to Great 139
had been less than a third the size of Bethlehemonlya decade earlier—
finally surpassedBethlehemin total revenues.62Even more astounding,
Nucor's average five-year profit per employee exceeded Bethlehem by
almost ten times.63 And for the investor, $1 invested in Nucor beat $1
investedin Bethlehem Steel byover 200times.
To be fair, Bethlehem had one giant problem not faced by Nucor:
adversarial labor relations and entrenched unions. Nucor had no union
and enjoyed remarkablygood relations with its workers. In fact, when
union organizers visited one plant, workers felt so ferociouslyloyal to
Nucorthat managementhadto protectthe unionorganizersfrom workers
who beganshoutingand throwingsand at them.64
But the unionargumentbegs a crucialquestion:Why did Nucor have
sucha betterrelationshipwith its workersin thefirst place?BecauseKen
Iversonand his team had asimple,crystallineHedgehogConcept about
aligningworker interestswith managementinterestsand—most impor
tantly—becausetheywere willingtogo toalmostextremelengthstobuild
the entireenterpriseconsistentwith that concept.Call them a bitfanati
cal ifyou want, but tocreategreatresultsrequiresa nearlyfanaticaldedi
cationto the ideaofconsistencywithinthe HedgehogConcept.
START A "STOP DOING" LIST
Do you have a "to do" list?
Do youalso have a "stop doing"list?
Most of uslead busy but undisciplinedlives. We have ever-expanding
"to do" lists,tryingtobuildmomentumby doing,doing,doing—anddoing
more. And it rarely works. Those who built thegood-to-greatcompanies,
however,made as much use of"stop doing" lists as "todo" lists. Theydis
playeda remarkabledisciplineto unplugall sorts ofextraneousjunk.
When Darwin Smith becameCEO ofKimberly-Clark,he made great
use of "stop doing" lists. He saw that playing the annual forecastgame
with Wall Street focused people too much on the short term, so he just
stoppeddoing it. "Onbalance,I see no netadvantageto ourstockholders
when we annuallyforecastfuture earnings,"said Smith. "We will not do
it"65 Hesaw "titlecreep"as a sign ofclass-consciousnessandbureaucratic
layering,so he simply unpluggedtitles. No one at the company would
havea title, unlessit was fora positionwherethe outsideworld demanded
a title. He saw increasinglayers as the natural resultof empire building.140 Jim Collins
So he simply unplugged a huge stack of layers with a simple elegant
mechanism: If you couldn't justifyto your peers the need for at least fif
teen people reporting to you to fulfill your responsibilities,then you
would have zero peoplereportingtoyou.66 (Keep in mindthathe did this
in the 1970s, long before it became fashionable.)To reinforcethe idea
that Kimberly-Clarkshould begin thinking of itselfas a consutner com
pany, not a papercompany,he unpluggedKimberlyfrom all paper indus
trytrade associations.67
The good-to-greatcompanies institutionalizedthe discipline of "stop
doing"throughthe useofa uniquebudgetmechanism.Stop and thinkfor
a moment:What isthe purposeofbudgeting?Mostanswerthat budgeting
existsto decide howmuch toapportionto eachactivity,or to managecosts,
or both. From agood-to-greatperspective,both oftheseanswersare wrong.
much^h"a#vj§0^^^^w^^tl^i^^^^Srv^c^'fK^^i^^^r^*
^t4^or^tbe^Hi9^
: whifMhaufdbeelimfnated/erfirply;/ \ ;t'vjf,-' /
Kimberly-Clarkdidn't justreallocateresourcesfrom the paper business
to the consumer business. It completelyeliminatedthe paper business,
sold the mills, and invested all the money into the emerging consumer
business.
I had aninterestingconversationwithsome executivesfroma company
in the paperbusiness.It's agood company,not yet agreat one, and they
had competeddirectlywithKimberly-ClarkbeforeKimberlytransformed
itselfinto a consumercompany.Out ofcuriosity,I asked them what they
thoughtofKimberly-Clark."WhatKimberlydid isnotfair," theysaid.
"Not fair?" I looked quizzical.
"Oh, sure,they'vebecomea much more successfulcompany.But, you
know, if we'd sold our paperbusinessand become a powerfulconsumer
company, we could have been great, too. But we just have too much
investedin it, and we couldn't havebroughtourselvesto do it."
If you look back on the good-to-great companies, they displayed
remarkablecourageto channel theirresourcesinto onlyone or afew are-Good to Great 141
nas. Once they understoodtheir three circles, they rarely hedged their
bets. Recall Kroger's commitmentto overturnits entire system to create
superstores,while A&P clung to the "safety" of its older stores. Recall
Abbott'scommitmentto putthe bulkofits resourcesinto becomingnum
ber one indiagnosticsand hospitalnutritionals,while Upjohnclungto its
core pharmaceutical business (where it could never be the best in the
world). Recall how Walgreensexited the profitablefood-servicebusiness
and focused all its might into one idea: the best, most convenientdrug
stores. Recall Gilletteand Sensor, Nucor and the mini-mills,Kimberly-
Clark andsellingthe mills to channel all itsresourcesinto the consumer
business. They all had the guts to make huge investments,once they
understoodtheirHedgehogConcept.
The most effective investmentstrategy is a highly undiversifiedport
folio when you are right.As facetiousas thatsounds,that'sessentiallythe
approachthe good-to-greatcompaniestook. "Being right" means getting
the HedgehogConcept;"highly undiversified"means investingfully in
those things that fit squarelywithin the three circles and getting rid of
everythingelse.
Ofcourse,the key here is the little caveat,"When you are right."But
how do you know when you re right? In studying the companies, we
learnedthat "beingright" just isn'tthat hard ifyou have all the pieces in
place. Ifyou have Level 5leaderswho get the right people on thebus,
if you confrontthe brutal facts of reality,if you create a climatewhere
thetruthis heard,ifyou have a Councilandwork withinthethreecircles,
ifyou frame all decisionsin the contextofa crystallineHedgehogCon
cept, if you act from understanding,not bravado—ifyou do all these
things,then you are likelyto be righton the big decisions.The real ques
tion is, onceyou knowtherightthing,do you have thedisciplinetodo the
rightthingand, equallyimportant,to stop doing the wrongthings?CULTURE OF DISCIPLINE
KEY .POINTS , .,"..•,'. . -,
Sustainedgreatresultsdependupon buildinga culturefall ofself-
disciplinedpeople who take disciplined'action,fanaticallyppn&is-
tentwith the threecircles. , ,
Bureaucraticculturesarise to compensatefor incompetenceand
lackofdiscipline,whicharisefrom hayingthe;wrongpeopleonthe
bus inthe firstplace.Ifyou getthe rightpeopleonthe bus,and the
wrongpeopleoff, you don'tneed stultifyingbureaucracy. .
A culture of discipline involves a duality. On the one hand, it
requirespeoplewho adheretoa consistentsystem;yet, onthe other
hand, it gives peoplefreedomand responsibilitywithintheframe
workof that system. < \; V?
Acultureof disciplineis not just aboutaction. It is aboutgetting
disciplinedpeoplewho engageindisciplinedthoughtand who then
takedisciplinedaction.
»The good-to-greatcompaniesappearboringand pedestrianlopking
infrom the outside,but upon closerinspection,they'reMl ofpeo
ple who displayextreme diligenceand a stunningintensityffhfy ^
"rinsetheir cottagecheese"). r x
 Do notconfuse a culture of disciplinewith a tyrant who disfei- :
plines—theyare verydifferentconcepts,one highlyfunctional,the }
otherhighlydysfunctional.SaviorCEOs who perspn^Uydiscipline
throughsheerforce ofpersonalityusuallyfail toproducesustained
results.
•The singlemostimportantform ofdisciplinefor sustainedresultsis
fanaticaladherenceto theHedgehogConceptandthe willingness
toshun opportunitiesthatfall outsidethethreecircles.
UNEXPECTED FINDINGS
• Themore anorganizationhas the disciplinetostaywithinits three
circles, with almost religious consistency,the more it will haye
opportunitiesfor growth.Good to Great 143
The fact that something is a "once-in-a-lifetimeopportunity"is
irrelevant,unless it fits within the three circles.Agreat company
will have many once-in-a-lifetimeopportunities.
The purpose of budgetingin a good-to-greatcompany is not to
decide how much each activitygets, but to decide which arenas
bestfit with theHedgehogConceptand shouldbefullyfundedand
which should notbe fundedat all.
"Stopdoing"listsaremore importantthan"to do" lists.C H A P T E R
Level5 FirstWho. .. Confront the Hedgehog Culture of|
Leadership Then What Brutal Facts Concept Discipline f
Most men would rather die, than think. Many do.
—Bertrand Russell1
'%*.:' n July 28, 1999, drugstore.com—oneofthe first Internetpharma
cies—soldsharesofits stockto thepublic.Withinsecondsofthe opening
bell, the stock multipliednearly threefoldto $65 per share. Four weeks
later, the stock closedas high as $69, creatinga marketvaluationofover
$3.5 billion.Notbad for an enterprisethathad sold productsfor less than
nine months,had fewer than 500 employees,offeredno hope ofinvestor
dividends,for years (ifnotdecades),and deliberatelyplannedtolose hun
dreds ofmillionsofdollarsbeforeturninga singledollarofprofit.2
Whatrationaledid peopleuse tojustifytheseratherextraordinarynum
bers? "New technologywill change everything,"the logic went. "The
Internetis going to completelyrevolutionizeall businesses,"the gurus
chanted. "It's the great Internetlandgrab: Be there first, be there fast,
build marketshare—nomatterhow expensive—andyou win," yelledthe
entrepreneurs.
We entered a remarkablemoment in historywhen the whole idea of
trying to build a great companyseemed quaint and outdated."Built toGood to Great 145
Flip"becamethe mantraofthe day. Justtell peopleyou were doingsome
thing, anything, connectedto the Internet,and—presto!—youbecame
rich by flippingsharestothe public,even ifyou had no profits(or even a
real company).Why take all the hard steps to go from buildupto break
through,creatinga model thatactuallyworks,when you couldyell, "New
technology!"or "New economy!"and convincepeople to give you hun
dreds of millions of dollars?
Some entrepreneursdidn'teven bothertosuggestthattheywouldbuild
a real companyatall, much less a greatone. One even filed to go public
in March of2000 with an enterprisethat consistedsolelyofan informa
tional Web site and a business plan, nothing more. The entrepreneur
admitted to the Industry Standard that it seemed strange to go public
beforestartinga business,but thatdidn'tstop him from tryingto persuade
investorsto buy 1.1 millionsharesat$7 to $9 per share,despitehavingno
revenues,no employees,no customers,no company.3With the new tech
nologyof the Internet, who needs all those archaic relics of the old econ
omy? Or so thelogic went.
At the high point ofthis frenzy, drugstore.comissued its challengeto
Walgreens.Atfirst,Walgreens'stocksufferedfrom the invasionofthe dot
coms, losingover 40 percentofits price in the months leadingup to the
drugstore.compublic offering.Wrote Forbes in October 1999: "Investors
seem to think that theWeb race will be won by competitorswho hit the
ground running—companieslike drugstore.com,which trades at 398
times revenue,ratherthanWalgreen,tradingat 1.4 times revenue."4Ana
lystsdowngradedWalgreens'stock,and the pressureon Walgreensto react
to the Internetthreatincreasedas nearly$15 billionin marketvalue evap
orated.5
Walgreens'responsein themidstofthis frenzy?
"We'rea crawl,walk, run company,"DanJorndttold Forbes in describ
ing his deliberate,methodicalapproachto the Internet.Insteadofreacting
like Chicken Little, Walgreensexecutivesdid somethingquite unusual
for the times. They decided to pause and reflect. They decided to use
their brains.They decided tothink!
Slow at first (crawl),Walgreensbegan experimentingwith a Web site
while engaginginintenseinternaldialogueand debateaboutits implica
tions, within the contextofits own peculiarHedgehogConcept. "How
will the Internetconnecttoour convenienceconcept?How can we tie it
to our economic denominator of cashflow per customervisit? How can
we use the Web to enhancewhatwe do betterthan any othercompanyin146 ]im Collins
the world and in a way that we're passionateabout?" Throughout,Wal
greens executivesembracedthe StockdaleParadox: "We have complete
faith that wecan prevailin an Internetworld asa greatcompany;yet, we
mustalso confrontthe brutalfacts ofrealityaboutthe Internet."One Wal
greensexecutivetold us afun littlestoryaboutthis remarkablemomentin
history.An Internetleadermade a statementaboutWalgreensalong the
lines of, "Oh, Walgreens. They're too old and stodgy for the Internet
world.They'llbeleftbehind."TheWalgreenspeople,while irked by this
arrogantcommentfrom the Internetelite, never seriouslyconsidereda
public response. Said one executive,"Let's quietlygo about doing what
we need to do, and it'llbecome clear soon enough that they justpulled
the tail of the wrongdog."
Then alittlefaster(walk),Walgreensbegantofind ways to tietheInter
net directlyto its sophisticatedinventory-and-distributionmodel and—
ultimately—itsconvenienceconcept.Fill your prescriptionon-line,pop
into your car and go to your local Walgreensdrive-through(in whatever
city you happen to be in at the moment), zoom past the window with
hardly a moment'spause pickingup your bottle ofwhatever.Or have it
shippedto you, ifthat's more convenient.There was no manic lurching
about,no hype, no bravado—justcalm, deliberatepursuitofunderstand
ing, followedby calm, deliberatesteps forward.
Then, finally (run!), Walgreensbet big, launchingan Internetsite as
sophisticatedand well designedas mostpuredot-coms.Justbeforewriting
this chapter,inOctober2000,we wenton-linetouse Walgreens.com.We
found it as easy to use and the system of delivery as reliable and well
thoughtout as Amazon.com(the reigningchampionofe-commerceat
the time). Preciselyone year after the Forbes article,Walgreenshad fig
ured out how to harnessthe Internet to accelerate momentum, making it
justthatmuch more unstoppable.Itannounced(on its Web site) a signif
icant increasein job openings,to supportits sustainedgrowth. From its
low point in 1999 at the depths ofthe dot-com scare, Walgreens'stock
pricenearlydoubledwithina year.
And whatofdrugstore.com?Continuingto accumulatemassivelosses,
itannouncedalayofftoconservecash.At its high point,littlemore thana
year earlier,drugstore.comtradedata price twenty-sixtimes higherthan
atthe time ofthis writing.Ithad lost nearlyall ofits initialvalue.6While
Walgreenswent from crawl to walk to run, drugstore.comwent from run
to walk to crawl.Good to Great 147
Perhaps drugstore.comwill figure out a sustainablemodel that works
and become a great company. But it will not become great because of
snazzy technology, hype, and an irrational stock market. It will only
become a great company if it figures out how to apply technologyto a
coherentconceptthat reflectsunderstandingofthe three circles.
TECHNOLOGY AND THE HEDGEHOG CONCEPT
Now, you mightbe thinking:"Butthe Internetfrenzyis justa speculative
bubble that burst. So what? Everybodyknew that the bubble was unsus
tainable,that it just couldn'tlast. Whatdoes that teach us aboutgood to
great?"
To beclear:The pointofthis chapterhas littleto dowith the specifics
ofthe Internetbubble,perse. Bubblescome andbubblesgo. It happened
with the railroads.It happenedwith electricity.It happenedwith radio. It
happened with the personal computer. It happened with the Internet.
And it will happenagain with unforeseennew technologies.
Yet through all of this change, great companies have adapted and
endured. Indeed, most of the truly great companiesof the last hundred
years—fromWal-MarttoWalgreens,from Procter&Gambleto Kimberly-
Clark,from MercktoAbbott—tracetheirrootsbackthroughmultiplegen
erations of technology change, be it electricity,the television, or the
Internet.They'veadapted before and emerged great. The best ones will
adapt again.
We could have predictedthat Walgreenswould eventuallyfigure out
the Internet.The companyhad a historyofmaking huge investmentsin
technology long before other companies in its industry became tech
savvy. In the early 1980s, it pioneereda massive network system called
Intercom.The idea was simple:By linkingall Walgreensstoreselectroni
cally and sendingcustomerdata to acentralsource,it turned every Wal-148 ]im Collins
greensoutlet in thecountryinto acustomer'slocalpharmacy.You live in
Florida, but you're visiting Phoenix and need a prescription refill. No
problem,the Phoenixstoreislinkedto the centralsystem,and it's justlike
goingdown to yourhometownWalgreensstore.
This mightseem mundane bytoday's standards.But whenWalgreens
made the investment in Intercom in the late 1970s, no one else in the
industryhad anythinglike it. Eventually,Walgreensinvestedover $400
millionin Intercom,including$100 millionfor its own satellitesystem.7
Touringthe Intercomheadquarters—dubbed"EarthStationWalgreen"—
"is liketakinga trip through aNASA space center with its stunningarray
of sophisticatedelectronicgadgetry,"wrote a trade journal.8Walgreens'
technical staffbecame skilledat maintainingevery piece of technology,
ratherthan relyingon outsidespecialists.9It didn'tstop there. Walgreens
pioneeredthe applicationof scanners,robotics,computerizedinventory
control, and advanced warehousetracking systems. The Internet is just
one more step in a continuous pattern.
Walgreensdidn'tadoptallof this advancedtechnologyjustfor the sake
ofadvancedtechnologyorin fearfulreactiontofallingbehind.No,it used
technologyasa tool to acceleratemomentumafter hittingbreakthrough,
and tied technology directly to its Hedgehog Concept of convenient
drugstoresincreasingprofitper customervisit. As an interestingaside, as
technology became increasinglysophisticatedin the late 1990s, Wal
greens' CIO (chiefinformationofficer) was a registeredpharmacistby
training,nota technologyguru.10Walgreensremainedresolutelyclear:Its
HedgehogConceptwould drive its use oftechnology,not the otherway
around.
The Walgreens case reflects a general pattern. In every good-to-great
case, we found technologicalsophistication.However, it was never tech
nologyperse, butthe pioneeringapplicationofcarefullyselectedtechnolo
gies. Everygood-to-greatcompanybecamea pioneerin theapplicationof
technology,but thetechnologiesthemselvesvariedgreatly.(See the table
on page 150.)
Kroger,for example,was an earlypioneerin theapplicationofbarcode
scanners,which helped it acceleratepast A&P by linkingfrontlinepur
chases to backroominventorymanagement.This might not sound very
exciting(inventorymanagementis notsomethingthattendsto rivetread
ers),but thinkofit thisway: Imaginewalkingbackintothe warehouseand
insteadofseeingboxes of cereal and crates ofapples,you see stacks andGood to Great 149
stacks of dollar bills—hundreds of thousands and millions of freshly
minted, crisp and crinkly dollar bills just sitting there on pallets, piled
high to the ceiling. That's exactly how you should think of inventory.
Everysingle case of cannedcarrotsis not justa case of cannedcarrots,it's
cash. And it's cash just sitting there useless, until you sell that case of
canned carrots.
Now recall how Kroger systematicallyshed its dreary old and small
grocerystores,replacingthem with nice,big, shinysuperstores.To accom
plish this task ultimatelyrequired more than $9 billion of investment-
cash thatwouldsomehowhave tobe pulledoutofthe low-margingrocery
business.To put this in perspective,Kroger put more than twice its total
annual profits into capital expenditureson average every year for thirty
years.11 Even more impressive,despitetakingon$5.5 billionofjunkbond
debt to pay a onetime $40-per-sharecash dividend plus an $8 junior
debenture to fight off corporate raiders in 1988, Kroger continued its
cash-intensiverevamping throughout the 1980s and 1990s.12 Kroger
modernizedand turnedover all its stores,improvedthe customer'sshop
ping experience, radicallyexpandedthe varietyof productsoffered,and
paid offbillionsofdollarsofdebt. Kroger'suse ofscanningtechnologyto
takehundreds of millionsofcrispand crinklydollarbillsout of the ware
house and put them tobetteruse became a key elementin its abilityto
pull offitsmagic trick—pullingnot one, nottwo, but three rabbitsout of
a hat.
Gillettealso became a pioneer in the applicationof technology.But
Gillette'stechnologyacceleratorslay largely in manufacturingtechnol
ogy. Think aboutthe technologyrequiredto make billions—literallybil
lions—oflow-cost,high-tolerancerazorblades.Whenyou andI.pickup a
Gilletterazor, we expect the blade to be perfectand we expect it to be
inexpensiveper shave. Forexample,to createthe Sensor,Gillette invested
over $200 millionin designanddevelopment,most ofit focusedon man
ufacturingbreakthroughs,and earnedtwenty-ninepatents.13It pioneered
the applicationof laser welding on a mass scale to shaving systems—a
technologynormallyused for expensiveand sophisticatedproducts like
heart pacemakers.14The whole key to Gillette'sshaving systems lay in
manufacturingtechnologyso unique and proprietarythat Gillette pro
tected it the way Coca-Colaprotects its secret formula, complete with
armed guards and securityclearances.15150 Jim Collins
Company
Abbott
TECHNOLOGY ACCELERATORS IN THE
GOOD-TO-GREATCOMPANIES
Technology AcceleratorsLinked to Hedgehog Concept
during Transition Era
Pioneeredapplicationof computertechnologyto
increaseeconomic denominator of profitper
employee.Nota leader in pharmaceuticalR&D—
leavingthat toMerck,Pfizer,and othersthat had a dif
ferent HedgehogConcept.
Circuit City Pioneered applicationofsophisticatedpoint-of-sale
and inventory-trackingtechnologies—linkedto the
concept of beingthe"McDonald's"of big-ticketretail
ing,able to operatea geographicallydispersedsystem
with greatconsistency.
Fannie Mae Pioneered applicationofsophisticatedalgorithmsand
computeranalysisto moreaccuratelyassess mortgage
risk, therebyincreasingeconomicdenominatorofprofit
per risk level."Smarter"systemof risk analysisincreases
accessto home mortgagesforlower-incomegroups,
linkingto passionfordemocratizinghome ownership.
Gillette Pioneeredapplicationofsophisticatedmanufacturing
technologyformakingbillionsofhigh-toleranceprod
ucts at low cost withfantasticconsistency.Protects
manufacturingtechnologysecretswith the same
fanaticismthat Coca-Colaprotectsitsformula.
Kimberly-Clark Pioneeredapplicationof manufacturing-processtech
nology,especiallyin nonwovenmaterials,to support
their passionatepursuitofproduct superiority.Sophis
ticated R&Dlabs; "babiescrawl about with tempera
ture and humiditysensorstrailingfrom their tails."
Kroger Pioneeredapplicationof computer and information
technologyto thecontinuousmodernizationofsuper
stores.First toseriouslyexperiment with scanners,
which it linked to the entirecash-flowcycle, thereby
providingfunds forthe massivestore-revampingprocess.Nucor
Good to Great 151
Pioneered application of the most advanced mini-
mill steel manufacturingtechnology."Shop the
world over"for the most advanced technology. Will
ing to make huge bets (up to 50 percent of corporate
net worth) on new technologiesthat others viewedas
risky, such as continuous thin slab casting.
Philip Morris Pioneered applicationof both packagingand manufac
turing technology.Bet ontechnologyto makeflip-top
boxes—thefirst packaginginnovationin twentyyears
in the industry.First to use computer-based manufac
turing. Hugeinvestmentin manufacturingcenter to
experimentwith, test,and refine advanced manufac
turing andqualitytechniques.
PitneyBowes Pioneeredapplicationofadvancedtechnologyto the
mailroom. At first, it took the form of mechanical
postagemeters.Later,Pitney investedheavilyin elec
trical, software,communications, and Internet engi
neering forthe mostsophisticatedback-office
machines. Made huge R&D investmentto reinvent
basicpostagemeter technologyin the 1980s.
Walgreens Pioneered application of satellite communications and
computer networktechnology,linked to itsconcept of
convenientcorner drugstores,tailoredto the unique
needs of specificdemographicsand locations. A "swal
lowyour tonsils"big investmenton a satellitesystem
that linksall storestogether,like one giant web of a sin
gle cornerpharmacy."Likea trip through NASA space
center." Led the restof theindustrybyat leasta decade.
Wells Fargo Pioneered applicationof technologiesthat would
increase economic denominator of profit per
employee. Earlyleader in twenty-four-hourbanking
by phone, earlyadopterof ATMs, firstto allowpeople
to buy and sell mutual funds at an ATM, pioneer in
Internet and electronic banking. Pioneered sophisti
cated mathematics to conduct better risk assessment
in lending.152 Jim Collins
Technology as an Accelerator, Not a Creator,
of Momentum
When Jim Johnson became CEO of Fannie Mae, following David
Maxwell,he and hisleadershipteam hireda consultingfirm to conduct a
technologyaudit. The lead consultant,BillKelvie,used a four-levelrank
ing, with four beingcuttingedge and one being StoneAge. Fannie Mae
ranked only a two. So, followingthe principleof "firstwho," Kelvie was
hired tomove the companyahead.16When Kelviecame to Fannie Mae in
1990,the companylaggedaboutten yearsbehindWall Streetin the use of
technology.
Over the nextfive years, Kelvie systematicallytook Fannie Mae from a
2 to a 3.8 on the four-pointranking.17He and his teamcreatedover 300
computer applications, including sophisticatedanalytical programs to
control the $600 billion mortgage portfolio, on-line data warehouses
covering60 million propertiesand streamlinedworkflows,significantly
reducingpaperand clericaleffort."We movedtechnologyout ofthe back
office and harnessed it to transform every part of the business," said
Kelvie. "We createdan expertsystem that lowers the cost of becominga
home owner. Lenders using our technologyreduced the loan-approval
time from thirtydays to thirtyminutesand loweredthe associatedcosts by
over $1,000 per loan."To date, the system has saved home buyers nearly
$4 billion.18
Noticethat the FannieMae transitionbeganin 1981,withthe arrivalof
David Maxwell, yet the company lagged behind in the application of
technologyuntil the early 1990s.Yes, technologybecame ofprime impor
tance to Fannie Mae, but after it discoveredits HedgehogConcept and
after it reachedbreakthrough.Technologywas a key part of what Fannie
Mae leaders called "the second wind" of the transformation and acted as
an acceleratingfactor.19The same patternholdsfor Kroger,Gillette,Wal-
greens,and all the good-to-greatcompanies—thepioneeringapplication
of technologyusuallycame late in thetransitionand neverat the start.
&$^^ \l1'-p|er^Good to Great 153
use of technology until you know which technologies are relevant
Andwhich are those? Those~and onlythose-Hhatlink>direetly;iothe
three intersectingcirclesof theHedgehogConcept I >-
To make technologyproductivein atransformationfrom good to great
means asking the following questions. Does the technologyfit directly
with yourHedgehogConcept?Ifyes, then you need to becomea pioneerin
the applicationof that technology.If no, thenask, do you need this tech
nologyat all? Ifyes, then allyou needis parity.(You don't necessarilyneed
the world's most advancedphone system to be a great company.)If no,
then the technologyisirrelevant,and you can ignoreit.
We came to see the pioneeringapplicationof technologyas just one
more way in which the good-to-greatcompanies remained disciplined
withinthe frame oftheir HedgehogConcept.Conceptually,their relation
shiptotechnologyis nodifferentfrom theirrelationshiptoany othercategory
of decisions:disciplinedpeople,who engage in disciplinedthought,and
who then take disciplinedaction.Ifa technologydoesn'tfitsquarelywithin
theirthree circles,they ignoreall the hype andfear and justgo abouttheir
business with a remarkable degree of equanimity. However, once they
understand which technologiesare relevant, they become fanatical and
creativein theapplicationofthose technologies.
In the comparisoncompanies,bycontrast,wefound onlythree casesof
pioneeringin the applicationoftechnology.Those threecases—Chrysler
(computer-aideddesign), Harris (electronicsapplied to printing), and
Rubbermaid(advancedmanufacturing)—wereall unsustainedcompar
isons, which demonstrates that technology alone cannot create sus
tained greatresults.Chrysler,for instance,madesuperb use ofadvanced
computer-aidedand otherdesigntechnologiesbut failedto linkthosetech
nologies to a consistentHedgehogConcept.As Chryslerstrayed outside
the threecirclesin the mid-1980s,from Gulfstreamjets to Maseratisports
cars, no advanced technologyby itself could save the company from
anothermassive downturn.Technologywithouta clear HedgehogCon
cept, and without the discipline to stay within the three circles, cannot
make a company great.154 Jim Collins
THE TECHNOLOGY TRAP
Two incidents stand out in my mind as I write this chapter. The first is
Time magazine'sselectionin 1999 of Albert Einsteinas "Person of the
20th Century." If you frame the person-of-the-centuryselectionaround
the question,How differentwould the world be today if thatperson had
not existed?the choice ofEinsteinissurprising,comparedto leaderslike
Churchill, Hitler, Stalin, and Gandhi—peoplewho truly changed the
courseof human history,for better orworse. Physicistspoint out that the
scientificcommunitywould have reachedan understandingof relativity
with or without Einstein, perhaps five years later, certainly ten, but not
fifty.20The Nazis nevergotthe bomb, and theAllieswould have won the
Second World War withoutit (althoughit would have cost moreAllied
lives).Why didTime pick Einstein?
In explainingtheir selection,Time editors wrote: "It's hard to com
pare the influenceof statesmenwith that ofscientists.Nevertheless,we
can note that there are certain eras that were most defined by their pol
itics,others bytheir culture, and othersbytheir scientificadvances.. . .
So, how will the 20th century be remembered? Yes, for democracy.
And,yes, forcivil rights.Butthe 20thcentury will be friostremembered
for itsearthshakingadvancesin scienceand technology. . . [which] . . .
advanced the cause of freedom, in some ways more than any statesman
did. In a century that will be remembered foremostfor its science and
technology. . . one person stands out as the paramount icon of our
age ... AlbertEinstein."21
In essence, the Time editors didn't pick the person of the century so
much astheypickedthe theme ofthe century—technologyand science—
and attached the most famous person to it. Interestingly,just a few days
beforethe Einstein announcement,Time announced itspersonofthe year
for 1999.Who did itpick?Noneotherthan the posterchild ofe-commerce,
Jeff Bezos of Amazon.com—reflectingyet again our cultural obsession
with technology-drivenchange. Let me beclear. I neither agree nor dis
agree with Time's choices. I simplyfind them interestingand illuminat
ing, becausetheygive usa windowintoour modernpsyche.Clearly,a key
item on our collectivemind istechnology,and itsimplications.
Which bringsme to thesecondincident.Takinga shortbreakfrom the
rigorsofwritingthis book, I traveledto Minnesotato teachsessionsat the
Masters Forum. The Masters Forum has held executive seminars for
nearly fifteen years, and I was curious to know which themes appearedGood to Great 155
repeatedlyoverthose years. "One of the consistentthemes," said Jim Eric-
son andPattyGriffinJensen,programdirectors,"istechnology,change—
and the connection between the two."
"Why do you supposethatis?" I asked.
"People don't know what they don't know," they said. "And they're
alwaysafraidthat somenewtechnologyisgoingto sneakup on themfrom
behind andknockthem on thehead. Theydon't understandtechnology,
and manyfear it.All theyknow for sureisthat technologyisan important
force of change, and that they'd better payattention to it."
Given our culture's obsessionwith technology,and given the pioneer
ing applicationof technologyin the good-to-greatcompanies,you might
expectthat "technology"would absorb a significantportion of thediscus
sion in our interviewswith good-to-greatexecutives.
fc" W4"3^fietgui€MrSOi^prisecJto find thatfully SO.peroebtofIhegood-tt>-^'
^gr^ie&e^
;ojfeofthe topftvefaetorsdnthe>transi^hi-FH^dr^<^in-th&tsasra>-
y^lfe^ t|\e^didtm^tjontechnology,Jt^fdl^-r^lac^i^kta^ of-
;v fourth,vyjihiarirytwo^xequtiyesofeighty^okfrinterviewedranfcingit-
If technologyis so vitally important,why did the good-to-greatexecu
tivestalksolittleabout it? Certainlynot becausetheyignoredtechnology:
They weretechnologicallysophisticatedand vastlysuperior to their com
parisons.Furthermore, a number ofthegood-to-greatcompanies received
extensivemedia coverageand awards for their pioneering use of technol
ogy. Yet the executiveshardlytalkedabouttechnology.It's as if the media
articles and the executiveswere discussingtwo totally different sets of
companies!
Nucor, for example,became widely known as one of the mostaggres
sive pioneers in the application of mini-mill steel manufacturing, with
dozens of articles and two books that celebrated its bold investments in
continuous thin slabcastingand electricarc furnaces.22Nucor became a
cornerstone case at business schools as an example of unseating the old
orderthrough the advancedapplicationof newtechnologies.
But when weasked Ken Iverson,CEO of Nucor during itstransition,to
name the top five factors in the shiftfrom good to great,where on the list156 Jim Collins
do you think he put technology?First? No. Second? No. Third? Nope.
Fourth? Not even. Fifth? Sorry, but no. "The primaryfactors,"said Ken
Iverson,"were the consistencyof thecompany,and our abilityto project
its philosophiesthroughoutthe whole organization,enabled by our lack
oflayersand bureaucracy."23
Stop and think about that for a moment. Here we have a consummate
case studyof upendingthe old orderwith newtechnology,and the CEO
who made it happen doesn'teven listtechnologyin the topfive factors in
the shiftfrom goodto great.
This same pattern continuedthroughoutthe Nucor interviews.Of the
seven key executivesand board members that we interviewed,only one
pickedtechnologyasthe number onefactorin theshift,and mostfocused
on otherfactors.Afew executivesdid talk aboutNucor'sbigbetson tech
nology somewhere in the interview,but they emphasizedother factors
even more—gettingpeople with a farmer work ethic on the bus,getting
the right people in key managementpositions,the simple structure and
lack of bureaucracy, the relentless performance culture that increases
profitper ton of finishedsteel. Technologywas part of the Nucor equa
tion, but a secondarypart. One Nucor executivesummed up, "Twenty
percent of our success is the new technologythat we embrace.. . [but]
eightypercent of oursuccessisin the culture ofour company."24
Indeed, you could have given the exact same technologyat the exact
same time to any number of companieswith the exact same resourcesas
Nucor—andeven still, they would have failed to deliver Nucors results.
Like the Daytona500, the primaryvariablein winningis not the car, but
the driver and his team. Not that the car is unimportant, but it is sec
ondary.
Mediocrity results first and foremost from management failure, not
technologicalfailure.Bethlehem Steel'sdifficultieshad less to do with the
mini-milltechnologyand more to dowith its historyof adversariallabor
relations,which ultimatelyhad its roots in unenlightenedand ineffective
management.Bethlehemhad alreadybegun its long slidebefore Nucor
and the othermini-millshad taken significantmarketshare.25In fact, by
the time Nucor made its technologicalbreakthroughwith continuous
thin slab castingin 1986, Bethlehemhad alreadylost more than 80 per
cent of itsvalue relativeto the market.This is not tosay that technology
played no role in Bethlehem'sdemise; technologydid play a role, and
ultimatelya significantone. Buttechnology'srolewas asan acceleratorofGood to Great 157
Bethlehem's demise,notthe cause of it.Again, it's the same principle at
work—technologyas anaccelerator,not acause—onlyin this comparison
case it is operating in reverse.
1966
Bethlehem Steel's Long Decline
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market,
June 1966 - December 2000
1976 1986 1996 2000
Indeed, when weexaminedthe comparisoncompanies,we did not find
a single example of a comparisoncompany's demise coming primarily
from atechnologytorpedo that blewit out of thewater. R. J.Reynoldslost
its positionas the number one tobacco company in the world not because
oftechnology,but becauseRJRmanagementthrashedabout with undisci
plined diversificationand, later,wenton a "let'smake managementrich at
the expense of the company" buyout binge. A&P fell from the second-
largestcompany in America to irrelevancenot because it lagged behind
Krogerin scanningtechnology,but becauseit lackedthe disciplineto con
frontthe brutal facts ofrealityaboutthe changingnature ofgrocerystores.
c ^Ke^W^e feom our:$tudyi6es;potsupporttheideathaitfchnplog-
k; jeatfhaftg#play^tfoe/pttacip£lrolejri the declineerf once-greatcom- 
;^|^ies forilheperpetualme#£&^ is ,
"r^iritpofferitTyou.can'tremainfilaggardan(MhqpeltobegreatButtech- ,
*,: nojogybyftseliis neveraprirnarycause^oleith§r4greatness;or:decline;.158 Jim Collins
Throughoutbusinesshistory,earlytechnologypioneersrarelyprevailin
the end. VisiCalc, for example, was the first major personal computer
spreadsheet.26WhereisVisiCalctoday?Doyou knowanyonewho uses it?
And what of the company that pioneered it? Gone; it doesn't evenexist.
VisiCalceventuallylostout to Lotus 1-2-3,which itselflostout to Excel.27
Lotus then wentinto a tailspin,saved only bysellingout to IBM.28 Simi
larly, the first portablecomputerscame from now-deadcompanies,such
as Osbornecomputers.29Today, we primarilyuse portablesfrom compa
nies such as Dell andSony.
This pattern of the second (or third orfourth) followerprevailingover
the earlytrailblazersshows up throughthe entire historyof technological
and economic change. IBM did not have the earlylead in computers. It
laggedso far behindRemingtonRand (whichhad the UNIVAC,the first
commerciallysuccessfullarge-scalecomputer)that people called itsfirst
computer"IBM's UNIVAC."30Boeing did not pioneer the commercial
jet. De Havilland did with the Comet, but lost ground when one of its
early jetsexplodedin midair, not exactlya brand-buildingmoment. Boe
ing, slowerto market,investedin makingthe safest,mostreliable jetsand
dominatedthe airways for over three decades.31I could go onfor pages.
GE did not pioneerthe AC electricalsystem;Westinghousedid.32 Palm
Computing did not pioneer thepersonaldigitalassistant;Apple did, with
its high-profileNewton.33AOL did not pioneer the consumer Internet
community;CompuServeand Prodigydid.34
We could make a long list ofcompaniesthat were technologyleaders
but that failed toprevailin the end as greatcompanies. It would be afas
cinating list initself,but all the exampleswould underscore a basic truth:
Technology cannot turn a good enterprise into a great one, nor by itself
prevent disaster.
Historyteaches thislessonrepeatedly.Consider the United Statesdeba
cle in Vietnam. The UnitedStateshad the mosttechnologicallyadvanced
fighting force the world has ever known. Super jet fighters. Helicopter
gunships.Advancedweapons.Computers.Sophisticatedcommunications.
Milesofhigh-techborder sensors.Indeed, the reliance on technologycre
ated a false sense of invulnerability.The Americans lacked not technol
ogy, but a simple and coherent concept for the war, on which to attach
that technology.It lurched back and forth across a varietyof ineffective
strategies,never gettingthe upper hand.
Meanwhile, the technologically inferior North Vietnamese forcesGood to Great 159
adheredto asimple,coherentconcept:a guerrillawar ofattrition,aimed
at methodicallywearingdown publicsupportfor the war at home. What
little technologythe North Vietnamesedid employ, such as the AK 47
rifle (much more reliable and easier to maintain in the field than the
complicated M-16), linked directly to that simple concept. And in the
end, asyouknow, the UnitedStates—despiteall itstechnologicalsophis
tication—did not succeed in Vietnam. If you ever find yourselfthink
ing that technologyalone holds the key to success,then think again of
Vietnam.
Indeed, thoughtlessreliance on technologyis a liability,not an asset.
Yes, when used right—whenlinkedto a simple,clear, and coherent con
cept rooted in deep understanding—technologyis an essentialdriver in
acceleratingforwardmomentum. But when usedwrong—whengrasped
asan easysolution, without deep understandingof how it links to a clear
and coherent concept—technology simply accelerates your own self-
created demise.
TECHNOLOGY AND THE FEAR OF
BEING LEFT BEHIND
The research team ferociouslydebated whether this topic merited its own
chapter.
"There must be a technologychapter,"said ScottJones. "We're bom
barded by the importance oftechnologythese days at the businessschool.
If we don'taddressit, we'llleave a huge hole in the book."
"But it seems to me," countered Brian Larsen, "that our technology
finding is just a special case ofdisciplinedaction, and it belongs in the
previous chapter. Disciplined action means stayingwithin the three cir
cles, and that's the essenceof ourtechnologyfinding."
"True, but it isavery specialcase,"pointedout ScottCederberg. "Every
one ofthe companies becameextremepioneersin the application oftech
nologylong before the restof theworld became technologyobsessed."
"But compared to other findingslike Level 5, the Hedgehog Concept,
and 'first who,' technology feels like a much smaller issue," retorted
AmberYoung. "I agreewith Brian:Technologyis important, but as a sub
set of discipline or perhaps theflywheel."
We argued throughout the summer. Then Chris Jones, in her typically160 Jim Collins
quiet and thoughtfulway, asked a key question: "Why did the good-to-
great companies maintain such a balanced perspectiveon technology,
when most companiesbecome reactionary,lurchingand runningabout
like ChickenLittle,aswe'reseeingwith the Internet?"
Why indeed.
Chris'squestionled usto anessentialdifferencebetweengreatcompa
niesand good companies,a differencethat ultimatelytippedthe balance
in favor of including thischapter.
Ifyou hadthe opportunitytosit down andread all2,000+pagesoftran
scripts from the good-to-greatinterviews,you'd be struck by the utter
absenceoftalkabout "competitivestrategy."Yes, theydid talkabout strat
egy, and theydidtalk aboutperformance,and theydid talkaboutbecom
ingthe best,and theyeven talkedaboutwinning.Butthey nevertalkedin
reactionary terms and never defined their strategies principally in
response to what others were doing. They talked in terms of what they
were tryingto create and how theywere trying to improve relativeto an
absolute standard of excellence.
When we asked GeorgeHarveyto describehismotivationfor bringing
change to PitneyBowes in the 1980s, he said: "I've always wantedto see
PitneyBowes as a greatcompany.Let's startwith that, allright? Let's just
startthere.That'sa giventhat needs no justificationor explanation.We're
not there today. We won't be theretomorrow.There is always so much
more to create forgreatnessin an ever-changingworld."35 Or as Wayne
Sanderssummed up about theethos that came totypify the inner work
ings of Kimberly-Clark:"We're just neversatisfied.We can bedelighted,
but never satisfied."36
Those who built the good-to-greatcompanies weren't motivated by
fear. They weren'tdriven by fear of what they didn't understand.They
weren't driven by fear of lookinglike a chump. They weren'tdriven by
fear ofwatchingothershit it bigwhiletheydidn't.Theyweren'tdrivenby
the fearof beinghammeredbythe competition.
^ii^^£^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^M^^^^^^^^^^^^WW^^fe,S^^^Sr^ffim,w®Fffil^^i9^Good to Great 161
Never was there a better example of this difference than during the
technologybubble of the late 1990s, which happened to take place right
smack in the middle of the research on good to great. It served as an
almostperfect stage to watch thedifferencebetween great and good play
itselfout, as the great ones respondedlike Walgreens—withcalm equa
nimity and quiet deliberate steps forward—while the mediocre ones
lurched about in fearful, frantic reaction.
Indeed, the big point of this chapter is not abouttechnologyper se. No
technology, no matter how amazing—notcomputers, not telecommuni
cations, not robotics, not the Internet—can by itself ignite a shift from
good togreat. No technologycan make you Level 5. No technologycan
turn the wrongpeopleinto the rightpeople.No technologycan instillthe
disciplineto confront brutalfacts of reality,nor can it instill unwavering
faith. No technologycan supplantthe need fordeepunderstandingof the
three circles and the translation of that understanding into a simple
HedgehogConcept. No technologycan createa culture ofdiscipline.No
technology can instill the simple inner belief that leaving unrealized
potential on the table—letting something remain good when it can
become great—isa secular sin.
Those that staytrue to these fundamentals and maintain their balance,
even in times of great change and disruption, will accumulate the
momentum that creates breakthrough momentum. Those that do not,
those that fall into reactionarylurching about, will spiral downward or
remain mediocre. This is the big-picturedifference between great and
good, the gestaltof the wholestudy captured in the metaphor of the fly
wheel versusthe doom loop.And it isto thatoverarchingcontrastthat we
now turn.TECHNOLOGY A C C E L £ ft A TORS
KEY, POINTS.  - ,/ *;"f _ <±/l : •;/;-:
• Good-to-greatorganizationsthinkdifferen%
technologicalchange thanmediocreones. . >
• Gobd-to-greatorganizationsavoid^technology^&;a^d;rot^^^''
ons, yet they become pioneers in $evapplicatiqn,~6f<c»ti^^.>.
selectedtechnologies. r
•The key questionaboutany technologyis, Does,the technologyfit
directlywith your HedgehogConcept? If yes, then yba need to
becomeapioneerin the application.-ofthattechnology.Ifno^tjhen?'
you cansettlefor parityor ignoreitentirely. rj
• The good-to-greatcompaniesused technologyas anAcceleratorp^
momentum, not a creatorof it.None of the gobd-tb-greatcbmpa*-
nies began their transformationswith pioneeringtechnolb^^yet;
they all became pioneersin the applicationof technologybnce
they grasped how it fit with their three circles;arid ^erjhey hit
breakthrough.
• You could have taken the exact same leading-edge^technologies
pioneered at the good-to-greatcompanies and handed them to;
their directcomparisonsfor freejand the comparisons-:s^^pt|l()S-
have failedto produceanywherenearthe sameresults:.
• How a companyreactsto technologicalchangeisa gopd indicatoir
ofits innerdrive for greatnessversus mediocrity.Greatcompanies!
respondwith thoughtfulnessand creativity,drivenby abompukiori
to turnunrealizedpotentialintoresults;mediocrecompaniesreact
and lurchabout,motivatedbyfeatofbeingleftbehind.
UNEXPECTED FINDINGS
• The idea that technologicalchange is the principal cause in the
decline of once-greatcompanies(ot the perpetual mediocrityof
others) is not supported by the evidence. Certainly, a company
can'tremaina laggardandhopetobe great,buttechnologybyitself
is never a primaryroot cause of eithergreatnessor decline.Good to Great 163
•Acrosseighty-fourinterviewswith good-to-greatexecutives,fully 80
percent didn't even mention technologyas one of the top five fac
tors in the transformation.This is true even in companies famous
fortheir pioneering applicationof technology,such as Nucor.
"Crawl, walk, run" can be a very effectiveapproach, even during
times of rapidandradicaltechnologicalchange.-C-H A R. T E R
Level 5 First Who. .. Confront the Hedgehog Culture of Technology
Leadership Then What Brutal Facts Concept Discipline Accelerators
mm
Revolutionmeansturningthe wheel.
—Igor Stravinsky1
icture a huge, heavy flywheel—amassive metal disk mounted hori
zontallyon an axle, about 30feet in diameter,2 feet thick, andweighing
about 5,000 pounds. Now imagine that your task is to get the flywheel
rotatingon the axleas fast and long aspossible.
Pushingwithgreat effort,youget the flywheelto inch forward,moving
almost imperceptiblyat first. You keep pushing and, after two or three
hours ofpersistenteffort,youget the flywheelto complete one entire turn.
You keep pushing, and theflywheelbeginsto movea bit faster,and with
continued great effort, you move it around a second rotation. You keep
pushing in a consistent direction.Three turns . . . four . . .five ... six . . .
the flywheel builds up speed... seven ... eight... you keep pushing...
nine ... ten ... it builds momentum ... eleven... twelve ... moving
fasterwith each turn ... twenty... thirty... fifty ... a hundred.
Then, at some point—breakthrough!The momentum of the thing
kicks in in your favor, hurling the flywheel forward, turn after turn ...
whoosh! ... its own heavy weight working for you. You're pushing noGood to Great 165
harder than during the first rotation, but the flywheel goes faster and
faster. Each turn of the flywheel builds upon work done earlier, com
pounding your investment of effort. A thousand times faster, then ten
thousand,then a hundred thousand.The huge heavy disk flies forward,
with almost unstoppable momentum.
Nowsupposesomeonecame along and asked, "What was the one big
push that causedthis thing to gosofast?"
You wouldn'tbe able toanswer;it's justa nonsensicalquestion.Was it
the first push? The second? The fifth? The hundredth? No! It was all of
themaddedtogetherin anoverallaccumulationofeffortappliedin a con
sistentdirection.Some pushesmay have been biggerthan others,but any
singleheave—nomatterhow large—reflectsa smallfractionofthe entire
cumulative effectupon the flywheel.
BUILDUP AND B R E A K T H R O U G H *
The flywheelimagecapturesthe overallfeel ofwhat it was like insidethe
companiesas they wentfrom good to great. No matter howdramaticthe
end result, the good-to-greattransformationsnever happenedin one fell
swoop. There was no single definingaction, no grand program, no one
killerinnovation,nosolitaryluckybreak,nowrenchingrevolution.Good
to great comes about by a cumulativeprocess—stepby step, action by
action,decisionby decision,turn by turn ofthe flywheel—thatadds up to
sustained and spectacularresults.
Yet to read media accounts of the companies, you might draw an
entirelydifferentconclusion.Often,the media does notcovera company
until the flywheel is alreadyturningat a thousandrotationsper minute.
This entirelyskews our perceptionofhow such transformationshappen,
makingit seem as ifthey jumpedrightto breakthroughas some sortofan
overnightmetamorphosis.
*Creditfor theterms buildupandbreakthroughshouldgoto David S.Landesand his
book, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor
(New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1998). On page 200, Landes writes: "The
questionisreallytwofold.First,why and how did any countrybreakthroughthecrust
ofhabitand conventionalknowledgeto this new mode ofproduction?Turningtothe
first, I would stress buildup—theaccumulationof knowledge and know-how; and
breakthrough—reachingand passingthresholds."When we read this paragraph,we
noted its applicabilitytoour studyand decidedtoadoptthese terms in describingthe
good-to-greatcompanies.166 Jim Collins
Forexample,on August27,1984,Forbesmagazinepublishedan article
on Circuit City. Itwas the firstnational-levelprofileeverpublished on the
company.It wasn'tthat bigofan article,justtwo pages,and it questioned
whetherCircuitCity's recentgrowth could continue.2Still, there itwas,
the first public acknowledgmentthat Circuit City had broken through.
The journalist had just identified a hot new company, almost like an
overnightsuccessstory.
This particularovernightsuccessstory,however,had been more than a
decade in the making. Alan Wurtzel had inherited CEO responsibility
from his fatherin 1973,withthe firm closeto bankruptcy.First,he rebuilt
his executive team and undertook an objective look at the brutal facts of
reality,both internaland external.In 1974,still strugglingwitha crushing
debt load, Wurtzel and his team began to experimentwith a warehouse
showroom style of retailing(large inventoriesof name brands, discount
pricing, and immediatedelivery) and built a prototypeof this model in
Richmond,Virginia,to sell appliances.In 1976, the company began to
experimentwith sellingconsumerelectronicsin thewarehouseshowroom
format, and in 1977, it transformedthe concept into the first-everCircuit
City store.
The conceptmet with success,and the companybegan systematically
convertingits stereo stores into Circuit City stores. In 1982—withnine
years ofaccumulatedturns on theflywheel—Wurtzeland his team com
mittedfully to the conceptof the Circuit Citysuperstore.Over the next
five years, as itshiftedentirelyto this concept,Circuit Citygeneratedthe
highest total return to shareholdersof any company on the New York
StockExchange.3From 1982 to 1999,CircuitCitygeneratedcumulative
stock returns twenty-twotimes better than the market, handily beating
Intel, Wal-Mart,GE, Hewlett-Packard,and Coca-Cola.
Not surprisingly,Circuit City then found itself a prime subject for
media attention. Whereas we found noarticlesof anysignificancein the
decade leading up the transition,we found ninety-sevenarticles'worth
examiningin the decade after the transition,twenty-twoof themsignifi
cantpieces.It's as ifthe companyhadn'teven existedpriortothat,despite
having traded on a major stock exchange since 1968, and despite the
remarkableprogressmade by Wurtzelandhis team in thedecadeleading
up to the breakthroughpoint.
The Circuit City experiencereflectsa common pattern. In case after
case,wefound fewerarticlesin the decadeleadingup to the point of tran
sitionthan in thedecadeafter,byan averagefactorofnearlythreetimes.4$300
$200
$100
1972
Good to Great 167
Circuit City
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, Number of Articles Found
December31, 1972 - December31, 1992 circuitCity: $311.64
Number of Articles
General Market: $8.35
1982 1992
For example, Ken Iverson and Sam Siegel began turning the Nucor
flywheel in 1965. For ten years, no one paid any attention,certainlynot
the financialpress or theothersteel companies.Ifyou had asked execu
tives at Bethlehem Steel or U.S. Steel about "The Nucor Threat" in
1970, they would have laughed, if they even recognizedthe company
name at all(which is doubtful).By 1975, the year of its transitionpoint
onthe stockchart,Nucorhad alreadybuiltits thirdmini-mill,longestab
lished its unique culture of productivity,and was well on its way to
becomingthe most profitablesteel company in America.5Yet the first
major article in BusinessWeek did not appear until 1978, thirteenyears
after the startofthe transition,and notin Fortune until sixteen years out.
From 1965 through 1975, we found onlyelevenarticleson Nucor, none
ofthem significant.Then from 1976 through 1995, we collectedninety-
six articles on Nucor, forty of them being major profiles or nationally
prominent features.
Now, you might be thinking,"But we should expect that. Of course
these companieswould get more coverageafter they become wildlysuc
cessful.What's so importantaboutthat?"168 Jim Collins
Here's what's important\Ne^4\000pemB^1i^|^W^|^^i^£ %
the ouisfdetodrive-our$eree[M^ "-\
goingthroughthem on tjte //T&/#fe;ft^ ,
rnatic, almost revolutionarybreakthroughs,Biijt irorri th^irisi^tfr|$\
fee/completelydifferent,mofe like aft o^^ *
Picturean egg just sittingthere. No onepays it much attentionuntil,
one day, the eggcracksopenand out jumpsa chicken!All the majormag
azines and newspapersjump on the event, writingfeature stories—"The
Transformationof Egg to Chicken!""The RemarkableRevolutionof the
Egg!" "StunningTurnaroundat Egg!"—asifthe egg had undergonesome
overnightmetamorphosis,radicallyalteringitselfintoa chicken.
But what does it look like from the chicken's point ofview? It's a com
pletelydifferentstory.Whilethe world ignoredthisdormant-lookingegg,
the chicken was evolving, growing, developing, incubating. From the
chicken'spointof view, crackingthe egg issimplyone morestepin a long
chain of steps leading up to that moment—a big step, to be sure, but
hardlythe radical,single-steptransformationit looks like to those watch
ing from outsidethe egg.
It's asilly analogy,granted.But I'm using it to highlighta very impor
tant findingfrom our research.Wekept thinkingthat we'd find "the one
big thing," the miracle moment that defined breakthrough.We even
pushed for it in our interviews.But the good-to-greatexecutivessimply
couldnot pinpointa singlekey eventor momentin timethat exemplified
the transition.Frequently,theychafedagainstthe whole ideaof allocating
points and prioritizingfactors. In every good-to-greatcompany, at least
one ofthe intervieweesgave an unpromptedadmonishment,sayingsome
thingalongthe linesof, "Look,you can't dissectthis thing into aseriesof
nice little boxes and factors,or identifythe moment of'Aha!' or the 'one
bigthing.'It was a wholebunch ofinterlockingpiecesthatbuiltone upon
another."
Even in the most dramatic case in our study—Kimberly-Clarkselling
the mills—theexecutivesdescribedan organic,cumulativeprocess."Dar
win did not change the directionof the company overnight,"said one
Kimberly-Clarkexecutive. "He evolved it over time."6 "The transition
wasn'tlike nightand day," said another."Itwas gradual,and I don't thinkGood to Great 169
itwas entirelyclearto everybodyuntila few years intoit."7Ofcourse,selling
the mills was a giganticpush on the flywheel,but it was only one push.
Afterselling the mills,the full transformationinto the number one paper-
based consumer products company required thousands of additional
pushes on the flywheel, big and small, accumulated one on top of
another. It tookyears to gain enough momentum for thepress to openly
herald Kimberly-Clark'sshiftfrom good to great.Forbeswrote,"When . . .
Kimberly-Clarkdecided to go head to head against P&G . . . this maga
zine predicted disaster. What a dumb idea. As it turns out, it wasn't a
dumb idea. It was a smart idea."8 The amount of time between the two
Forbesarticles?Twenty-oneyears.
While working on the project, we made a habit of asking executives
who visited our research laboratorywhat they would want to know from
the research. One CEO asked,"What did they call what they were doing?
Did they have a name for it? How did they talk about it at the time?" It's a
great question, and we went back to look. The astounding answer: They
didnt call itanything.
The go§drtp-great companieshad: no namefor their transformations.
There was no-launch event, no tag line, no programmatic feel whatso-
i ;ever, Some executives said that they weren't even aware that a major
; iran^foWatioh was under way until they were well into it It was often
V more oMous to them after the fact than at the time,
Then it began to dawn on us: There was no miracle moment. (See the
table on page170.)Althoughit mayhave lookedlikea single-strokebreak
through to those peering in from the outside, it was anything but that to
people experiencing the transformation from within. Rather, it was a
quiet, deliberate processof figuringout what needed to be done to create
the best future results and then simply taking those steps, one after the
other, turn by turn of the flywheel. After pushing on that flywheel in a
consistent direction overan extended period of time, they'dinevitablyhit
a point of breakthrough.170 Jim Collins
'NO MIRACLE MOMENT' IN GOOD TO GREAT
Abbott "It wasn'ta blindingflash or suddenrevelationfrom
above."9"Ourchangewas a majorchange,and yetin
many respectssimplya seriesof incremental
changes—thisiswhatmade that change successful.
We did this in a nicestepwiseway and there were
alwaysa lot of common denominatorsbetween what
wehad alreadymasteredand whatwewere embarking
"10on.
Circuit City "The transitionto focus on the superstoredidn't hap
pen overnight.We first consideredthe concept in
1974,but we didn't convertfully to Circuit City super
storesuntil about ten yearslater, after we'd refined the
concept and built enough momentum to bet our
whole future on it."11
FannieMae "There was no onemagicalevent,no one turningpoint.
It was a combinationofthings.More ofan evolution,
thoughthe endresultswere dramatic."12
Gillette "We didn'treallymakea big consciousdecisionor
launch a bigprogramto initiatea majorchangeor
transition.Individuallyand collectivelywe werecom
ing toconclusionsabout what we could do to dramati
callyimproveour performance."13
Kimberly-Clark "I don't think itwas done as bluntlyas itsounds.These
thingsdon't happenovernight.They grow. The ideas
grow and mushroomand come intobeing."14
Kroger "It wasn't a flash from the blue. We had all been
watchingexperimentalsuperstoresdevelop,and we
werepretty well persuadedthat the industrywouldgo
that way. The majorthing that Lyledid was to saythat
we're goingto change beginningnow, on a verydelib
erate basis."15Nucor
Good to Great 171
"We did not make a decision that this was what we
stood forat anyspecificmoment.It evolvedthrough
many agonizingargumentsand fights. I am not sure
that weknew exactlywhatwe were fightingfor until
welookedbackand said that wewere fightingto estab
lishwho wewere goingto be."16
PhilipMorris "It's impossibleto thinkofone bigthingthat would
exemplifya shiftfrom goodto greatbecause our suc
cess was evolutionaryas opposedto revolutionary,
buildingsuccessupon success.I don't knowthat there
was anysingleevent."17
PitneyBowes "Wedidn't talkso much ofchange.We recognized
earlyon not so much that we neededto change,but
that weneededto evolve,which recognizesthat we've
got to do thingsdifferently.We realized that evolution
isa whole differentconceptthan change."18
Walgreens "There was no seminalmeetingor epiphanymoment,
no one bigbrightlightthat came on likea lightbulb.It
was sortofan evolutionthing."19
Wells Fargo "Itwasn'ta singleswitchthatwas thrownat onetime.
Littlebylittle,the themesbecamemoreapparentand
stronger.When Carl becameCEO, there wasn'tany
greatwrenching.Dickled onestageofevolutionand
Carl thenext, and it justproceededsmoothly,rather
than an abruptshift."20
When teaching this point, I sometimesuse an example from outside
my research thatperfectlyillustratesthe idea:the UCLABruins basketball
dynastyof the 1960s and early 1970s. Most basketballfans know that the
Bruins won ten NCAA Championships in twelve years, at one point
assemblinga sixty-one-gamewinningstreak, under the legendarycoach
John Wooden.21
But do you know how manyyears Wooden coached the Bruins before
his first NCAA Championship? Fifteen. From 1948 to 1963, Wooden
worked in relative obscurity before winning his first championship in
1964.Year byyear, Coach Wooden built theunderlyingfoundations,de-172 Jim Collins
velopinga recruiting system,implementinga consistentphilosophy,and
refiningthe full-court-pressstyle ofplay. No one paid too much attention
to the quiet, soft-spokencoach and his team until—wham!—they hit
breakthrough and systematicallycrushed every serious competitor for
more than a decade.
Like the Wooden dynasty, lasting transformationsfrom good to great
follow a general pattern of buildup followed by breakthrough. In some
cases,the buildup-to-breakthroughstage takes a long time, in other cases,
a shorter time. At Circuit City, the buildup stage lasted nine years, at
Nucor ten years,whereas at Gillette it took onlyfive years,at Fannie Mae
onlythree years,and at PitneyBowesabout twoyears. But, no matter how
short or long ittook, everygood-to-greattransformationfollowedthe same
basic pattern—accumulatingmomentum, turn by turn of the flywheel—
until buildup transformedinto breakthrough.
NOT JUST A LUXURY OF CIRCUMSTANCE
It's important to understand that following the buildup-breakthrough
flywheel model is not just a luxury of circumstance. People who say,
"Hey, but we've got constraintsthat prevent us from taking this longer-
term approach," should keep in mind that the good-to-greatcompanies
followed this model no matter how dire the short-term circumstances—
deregulation in the case of Wells Fargo, looming bankruptcy in the
cases of Nucor and Circuit City, potential takeover threats in the cases
of Gillette and Kroger, or million-dollar-a-daylosses in the case of Fan
nie Mae.
This alsoappliesto managingthe short-termpressuresofWallStreet."I
justdon't agreewith thosewho say youcan't build an enduring great com
pany because Wall Street won't let you," said DavidMaxwell of Fannie
Mae. "We communicated with analysts,to educate them on what we were
doing and where we weregoing. At first, a lot of people didn't buy into
that—youjusthaveto acceptthat. Butonce wegotthrough the dark days,
we respondedby doingbetter everysingleyear. Aftera few years,because
of our actual results, we became a hot stockand never lookedback."22And
a hot stock it was. During Maxwell's first two years, the stock lagged
behind the market, but then it took off. From the end of 1984 to the year
2000, $1 investedin Fannie Mae multipliedsixty-fourtimes, beating theGood to Great 173
general market—including the wildly inflated NASDAQ of the late
1990s—bynearlysixtimes.
/ The, goo^to-greatcompanies,were subjectto thesame short-term
pressuresfrom Wad Stomas thefprnpatri^ncompanies.Yet, unlike
the bdrhparisqncompanresfthey;had;thepatienceand disciplineto
followthebuildup-breakthrough1flywheel model despite'these pres-
-y gupes. And in the end, they attained extraordinaryresults by Wall
'. Street's own measure of,success./
The key, we learned,is to harnessthe flywheelto manage these short-
term pressures.One particularlyelegantmethodfor doing so came from
Abbott Laboratories,using a mechanismit called the Blue Plans. Each
year, Abbottwould tell Wall Streetanalyststhat it expectedtogrow earn
ings a specifiedamount—say,15 percent.At the same time, itwould set
an internalgoal ofa muchhighergrowthrate—say,25 percent,oreven 30
percent.Meanwhile,itkept a rank-orderedlist ofproposedentrepreneur
ial projects that had not yet been funded—theBlue Plans. Toward the
end oftheyear,Abbottwould picka numberthatexceededanalystexpec
tationsbut thatfell shortofits actualgrowth.It would then take the differ
ence between the "make the analysts happy" growth and the actual
growth and channel those funds into the Blue Plans. It was a brilliant
mechanismfor managingshort-termpressureswhilesystematicallyinvest
ing in thefuture.23
We found no evidenceofanythinglike the Blue PlansatAbbott'scom
parison company.Instead,Upjohn executiveswould pump up the stock
with a sales job ("Buy into our future"), reverentlyintoningthe phrase
"investingfor the long-term," especially when the company failed to
deliver current results.24 Upjohn continuallythrew money after hare
brainedprojectslike its Rogainebaldnesscure, attemptingto circumvent
buildupand jump right to breakthroughwith a big hit. Indeed, Upjohn
remindedus ofa gambler,puttinga lot ofchips on red at Las Vegas and
saying, "See, we're investingfor the future." Of course, when the future
arrived,the promisedresultsrarelyappeared.
Not surprisingly,Abbottbecamea consistentperformerand a favorite
holding on Wall Street, while Upjohn became a consistentdisappoint-174 Jim Collins
ment. From 1959 to Abbott's point of breakthrough in 1974, the two
stocks roughlytrackedeach other.Then theydramaticallydiverged,with
Upjohnfallingmore than six times behindAbbottbeforebeingacquired
in 1995.
$300
$200
$100
1959
Abbott versus Upjohn
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1959-1995
1974
Abbott:$271
Upjohn:$40
1989 1995
Like Fannie Mae and Abbott, all the good-to-greatcompanieseffec
tively managedWall Streetduringtheirbuildup-breakthroughyears, and
theysaw no contradictionbetweenthetwo. Theysimplyfocusedon accu
mulatingresults, often practicingthe time-honoreddisciplineof under-
promisingandoverdelivering.And as theresultsbegantoaccumulate—as
the flywheel built momentum—theinvesting communitycame along
with greatenthusiasm.
THE "FLYWHEEL EFFECT"
The good-to-greatcompanies understood a simple truth: Tremendous
power exists in the fact of continuedimprovementand the delivery of
results.Pointtotangibleaccomplishments—howeverincrementalatfirst—
and show how these steps fit into thecontextof an overall concept that
will work. When you do this in such a way that people see and feel theGood to Great 175
buildup of momentum,they will line up with enthusiasm.We came to
call this the flywheeleffect,and itappliesnotonlyto outsideinvestorsbut
also to internalconstituentgroups.
Steps Forward,
Consistent with
ff HedgehogConcept
Flywheel Builds Accumulation of
Momentum Visible Results
People Line Up,
Energized by Results
The Flywheel Effect
Let meshare a storyfrom the research.At a pivotalpoint in thestudy,
membersofthe researchteam nearly revolted.Throwingtheir interview
notes on the table, they asked, "Do we have to keep asking that stupid
question?"
"What stupidquestion?"I asked.
"The one about commitment, alignment, and how they managed
change."
"That's not a stupid question,"I replied. "It's one of the most im
portant."
"Well," said one team member, "a lot of the executives who made the
transition—well,they thinkit'sa stupidquestion.Some don't even under
stand the question!"
"Yes,we needto keep askingit," I said. "We need tobe consistentacross
the interviews.And, besides, it's even more interestingthat they don't176 Jim Collins
understandthe question.So, keep probing.We've gotto understandhow
theyovercameresistanceto changeand gotpeoplelined up."
I fully expectedto find thatgettingeveryonelined up—"creatingalign
ment," to use the jargon—wouldbe one of the topchallengesfaced by
executivesworkingtoturn good intogreat.Afterall,nearlyeveryexecutive
who'd visited the laboratory had asked this question in one form or
another."How do we getthe boat turned?""How do we getpeoplecom
mitted to the newvision?""Howdo wemotivatepeople to line up?" "How
do we getpeopleto embracechange?"
To my greatsurprise,we did notfind the questionofalignmentto be a
key challengefaced bythe good-to-greatleaders.
Clearly,the good^o-greateompainfesdid get incredibl^om^ .*•-'
and alignmer#i-they>afffMlIyma^aied^ejfange^but1^;(V^^^^ .
spent much time thinking[aboutitft waf^
We learnedthat undfrthe"rljB^p^^P^iheTptet^ '
ment, alignment,motivationand^h^lge^jkstmeltWk^iThe^larg^ly.
take care ofthemse|Iye$.tv \< ,\ -/, /!,% .'. ,'-\ .. ,fv - ;-:<- \ ** ""
ConsiderKroger. How doyou get a companyofover 50,000 people—
cashiers, baggers, shelf stockers, produce washers, and so forth—to
embracea radicalnew strategythatwill eventuallychangevirtuallyevery
aspectofhow the companybuildsandruns grocerystores?The answeris
that you dont. Not in one bigeventorprogram,anyway.
Jim Herring, the Level 5 leader who initiatedthe transformationof
Kroger, told us that he avoided any attemptsat hoopla and motivation.
Instead,he andhis teambeganturningtheflywheel,creatingtangibleevi
dence thattheir plans made sense. "We presentedwhat we were doing in
such a way that people saw our accomplishments,"said Herring. "We
tried to bring our plans to successfulconclusionstep by step, so that the
mass of people would gain confidencefrom the successes,not just the
words."25Herringunderstoodthattheway toget peoplelinedupbehinda
bold new vision is to turn theflywheel consistentwith that vision—from
two turns to four, then four to eight, then eight to sixteen—andthen to
say, "See what we're doing,and how well it is working?Extrapolatefrom
that, and that's where we're going."
The good-to-greatcompaniestendednotto publiclyproclaimbig goalsGood to Great 177
at theoutset. Rather, they began to spin the flywheel—understandingto
action,step afterstep, turn afterturn. After the flywheelbuilt up momen
tum, they'd look up andsay, "Hey, ifwe just keep pushingon this thing,
there's noreasonwe can'taccomplishX."
For example,Nucorbeganturningtheflywheelin 1965,at first justtry
ing toavoid bankruptcy,then later buildingits first steel mills becauseit
could notfind a reliablesupplier.Nucorpeoplediscoveredthatthey had
a knackfor makingsteelbetterandcheaperthananyoneelse,so theybuilt
two, and then three, additionalmini-mills.They gained customers,then
more customers, then more customers—whoosh!—theflywheel built
momentum, turn by turn, month bymonth, year by year. Then, around
1975, itdawnedon theNucorpeoplethatifthey justkept pushingon the
flywheel,they could becomethe numberone, most profitablesteel com
pany in America.ExplainedMarvin Pohlman:"I remembertalkingwith
Ken Iverson in 1975, and he said, 'Marv, I think we can become the num
ber one steel companyin the U.S.' 1975! And I said to him, 'Now, Ken,
when are yougoingto be number one?''I don'tknow,'he said. 'But if we
justkeep doingwhatwe're doing,there'sno reasonwhy we can't become
numberone.' "26 Ittook overtwo decades,butNucorkeptpushingthe fly
wheel, eventuallygeneratinggreaterprofitsthan any othersteel company
on the Fortune 1000 list.27
When you letthe flywheeldo thetalking,you don't need tofervently
( communicate your:go^ls.. People qs^n just extrapolate-from the„
momentumof theflywheelforthemselves:"Hey, ifwejust keep doing
k.this, lopk at yvh^refiw^carbgoPAs peopjeyecide amongthemselves
, &> turn;tb§ fact of potentialinto,the fact of results,'thegoal almost
1 sets itself. \ " ' / -\; ' ~; - - : ' '•"
Stop and think about it for a minute. What do the right people want
more than almostanythingelse? Theywant tobe partofa winningteam.
They want to contributeto producingvisible,tangibleresults.They want
to feel the excitementof being involved in somethingthat just flat-out
works. When the right people see a simple plan born ofconfrontingthe
brutal facts—a plan developed from understanding,not bravado—they
are likelyto say, "That'llwork. Count mein." When they see themono
lithicunityofthe executiveteam behindthesimpleplan and theselfless,178 Jim Collins
dedicated qualities of Level 5 leadership, they'll drop their cynicism.
When peoplebeginto feel the magicofmomentum—whentheybegin to
see tangible results, when they can feel the flywheel beginningto build
speed—that'swhen the bulk ofpeople line up to throw their shoulders
againstthe wheel and push.
THE DOOM LOOP
Wefound a verydifferentpatternat the comparisoncompanies.Insteadof
a quiet, deliberateprocess of figuring out what needed to be done and
then simplydoingit,the comparisoncompaniesfrequentlylaunchednew
programs—oftenwith greatfanfare and hoopla aimed at "motivatingthe
troops"—onlyto seethe programsfail to producesustainedresults.They
soughtthe singledefiningaction,the grand program,the onekillerinno
vation, the miracle moment that would allow them to skip the arduous
buildup stage and jump right to breakthrough.They would push the fly
wheel in one direction, then stop, change course,and throw it in a new
direction—andthen theywouldstop, changecourse,and throwit into yet
another direction.After years of lurching back andforth, the comparison
companiesfailedto buildsustainedmomentumand fell insteadinto what
we came to call the doom loop.
Consider the case ofWarner-Lambert,the direct comparison company
to Gillette.
In 1979, Warner-Lambert told BusinessWeek that it aimed to be a lead
ingconsumerproductscompany.28
One yearlater,in 1980,it did an abruptabout-faceand turned itssights
on health care, saying, "Our flat-out aim is to go after Merck, Lilly,
SmithKline—everybodyandhis brother."29
In 1981,the companyreversedcourseyetagainand returned to diversi
ficationand consumergoods.30
Six years later, in 1987, Warner-Lambertdid anotherU-turn,away from
consumergoods, to try once again to belike Merck. (At the same time, the
companyspent three times as much on consumer-goodsadvertisingas on
R&D—asomewhatpuzzlingstrategy,for acompanytryingtobeatMerck.)31
In the early 1990s,reactingto Clinton-erahealth carereform,the com
panythrewitselfintoreverseyetagainand reembraceddiversificationand
consumer brands.32Reaction, without
Understanding _ ^ No Bu|LDUp;
No Accumulated
Momentum
Disappointing
Results
Good to Great 179
Program, Leader,
Event, Fad,
or Acquisition
The Doom Loop
Each new Warner-LambertCEO broughthis own new program and
halted the momentum of hispredecessor.Ward Hagen tried to create a
breakthroughwith an expensiveacquisitionin the hospitalsupply busi
ness in 1982. Three years later, his successor, Joe Williams, extracted
Warner-Lambertfrom the hospitalsupply businessand took a $550 mil
lionwrite-off.33He tried to focus the companyon beatingMerck,but his
successorthrewthe companybacktodiversificationand consumergoods.
And soit went,backand forth,lurchand thrash,with eachCEO tryingto
makea markwith his ownprogram.
From 1979 through 1998, Warner-Lambert underwent three major
restructurings—oneper CEO—hacking away 20,000 people in search of
quickbreakthroughresults.Time andagain, the companywould attaina
burstof results,then slacken,neverattainingthe sustainedmomentum of
a buildup-breakthroughflywheel. Stock returns flattened relative to the
market and Warner-Lambertdisappearedas an independent company,
swallowedup by Pfizer.34180 Jim Collins
The Warner-Lambert case is extreme, but we found some version of the
doom loop in every comparisoncompany. (SeeAppendix8.A for a sum
mary.) While the specific permutations of the doom loop varied from
company to company, there were some highly prevalent patterns, two of
which deserveparticularnote: the misguideduse ofacquisitionsand the
selectionofleaderswho undid thework ofpreviousgenerations.
The Misguided Use of Acquisitions
Peter Drucker once observedthat the drive for mergers and acquisitions
comesless from sound reasoningand morefrom the fact that doingdeals
is a much moreexcitingway to spend your day than doing actualwork.35
Indeed, the comparisoncompanieswould havewell understoodthe pop
ular bumper stickerfrom the 1980s, "When the going gets tough, we go
shopping!"
To understand the role ofacquisitionsin the processofgoingfromgood
to great, we undertook asystematicqualitativeand quantitativeanalysisof
all acquisitionsand divestituresin all the companies in our study, from
ten years before the transitiondate through 1998. While we noticed no
particular pattern in the amount or scaleofacquisitions,we didnote a sig
nificant difference in the success rate of the acquisitions in the good-to-
great companiesversusthe comparisons.(SeeAppendix8.B.)
*Why;didthe goQ^^^
ces^rate-#^^^
. theirsuccesssms:thaMheirbi|j•gcgui^lioA^ener^lytpqfeplfte^ftef'
-A dWelbpm^rit'ofihe: l^bg^hp^f6Srt^pt'aiE^l^$'^9iE:^Hc^'^wh^i'hacfe;
^bujltsicjnificsintmornenttum,lft%j}^6^<^^ aps$s*&ri&cbelemtQP>
In contrast,the comparisoncompaniesfrequentlytried to jump right to
breakthrough via an acquisition or merger. It never worked. Often with
their core business under siege, the comparison companies would dive
into a big acquisitionasaway to increasegrowth,diversifyawaytheir trou
bles, or make a CEO lookgood. Yet they neveraddressedthe fundamen
tal question: "What can we do better than any other company in theGood to Great 181
world,that fits our economic denominator and that we have passionfor?"
They never learned the simple truth that, while you can buy yourway to
growth,you absolutelycannot buy yourway to greatness.Two big medi
ocritiesjoinedtogethernevermakeone great company.
Leaders Who Stop the Flywheel
The other frequently observeddoom loop pattern is that of new leaders
who stepped in, stopped an already spinning flywheel,and threw it in
an entirely new direction. ConsiderHarrisCorporation, which applied
many of thegood-to-greatconcepts in the early1960s and began a clas
sic buildup processthat led tobreakthroughresults.George Divelyand
his successor,Richard Tullis,identifieda HedgehogConcept, based on
the understandingthat Harriscould be the bestin theworld at applying
technology to printing and communications. Although it did not
adhere to this concept with perfect discipline (Tullis had a penchant
for straying a bit outside the three circles), the company did make
enough progressto produce significantresults.It looked like a promis
ing candidate for a good-to-greattransformation,hitting breakthrough
in 1975.
Then the flywheelcameto a grindinghalt.
In 1978,JosephBoyd becamechief executive.Boyd had previouslybeen
with Radiation,Inc.,a corporationacquiredbyHarrisyearsearlier.His first
key decisionas CEO was to move the companyheadquartersfrom Cleve
land to Melbourne, Florida—Radiation's hometown, and the location of
Boyd'shouseand forty-seven-footpowerboat,the Lazy Rascal}6
In 1983, Boyd threw a giantwrench into the flywheelby divestingthe
printing business.At the time, Harris was the number one producer of
printing equipment in the world. The printing businesswas one of the
most profitableparts of the company, generatingnearly a third of total
operatingprofits.37What did Boyd do with the proceedsfrom sellingoff
this corporate gem? He threw the company headlong into the office
automation business.
But could Harris become the best in the world in office automation?
Not likely. "Horrendous"software-developmentproblemsdelayed intro
duction ofHarris'first workstationasthe companystumbledonto the bat
tlefieldto confrontIBM, DEC, andWang.38Then, in anattemptto jump
rightto a newbreakthrough,Harrisspenta thirdofits entirecorporatenet182 Jim Collins
worth to buy LanierBusinessProducts,a companyin the low-end word
processingbusiness.39Computerworldmagazinewrote:"Boydtargetedthe
automated officeas akey.... Unfortunately,for Harris,the company had
everythingbut an office product. The attempt to design and market a
word processingsystem met with dismal failure . . . out of tune with the
market,and had to bescrappedbeforeintroduction."40
The flywheel, which had been spinningwith great momentum after
Divelyand Tullis, came detachedfrom the axle, wobbled into the air, and
then crashedto a grindinghalt. From the end of 1973 to the end of 1978,
Harris beat the market by more thanfive times. But from the end of 1978
to the end of1983, Harrisfell 39percentbehind the market,and by 1988
it had fallen over 70 percent behind. The doom loop replaced the fly
wheel.
THE FLYWHEEL AS A WRAPAROUND IDEA
When I look over the good-to-greattransformations,the one word that
keeps coming to mind is consistency. Another word offered to me by
physicsprofessorR. J. Peterson is coherence."What is one plus one?" he
asked, then paused for effect. "Four! In physics, we have been talking
about the idea of coherence, the magnifyingeffect of one factor upon
another. In reading about the flywheel, I couldn't help but think of the
principle of coherence." However you phrase it, the basic idea is the
same: Each piece of the systemreinforcesthe other parts of thesystemto
form an integratedwholethat is much morepowerfulthan the sum of the
parts. It is only through consistencyover time, through multiple genera
tions,that you get maximumresults.
In a sense, everythingin this bookis an explorationand descriptionof
the piecesof the buildup-to-breakthroughflywheelpattern. (See the table
on page 183.) In standing back to survey the overall framework,we see
that every factor works together to create this pattern, and each compo
nent produces a push^pnthe flywheel.Good to Great 183
HOW TO TELL IF YOU'RE ON THE
ELYWHEELOR LITHE DOOM LOOP
Signs That You're on the Flywheel Signs That You're in the Doom Loop
(Good-to-GreatCompanies) (Comparison Companies)
Followa pattern of buildup Skip buildup and jump right to
leading tobreakthrough. breakthrough.
Reach breakthrough by an Implement bigprograms,radi
accumulation of steps,one after cal changeefforts,dramatic
the other, turn by turn of the revolutions; chronic
flywheel;feels like an organic restructuring—alwayslooking
evolutionaryprocess. for a miracle moment or new sav
ior.
Confront the brutal facts to see Embrace fads and engage in
clearlywhat steps must be taken managementhoopla, rather
to build momentum. than confront the brutal facts.
Attain consistencywith a clear Demonstrate chronic inconsis
Hedgehog Concept, resolutely tency—lurchingback and forth
stayingwithin the three circles. and strayingfar outsidethe three
circles.
Followthe pattern of disciplined Jump right to action, without
people ("firstwho"), disciplined disciplinedthought and without
thought, disciplinedaction. firstgettingthe right people on the
bus.
Harness appropriate tech Run about like Chicken Little
nologiesto your Hedgehog in reaction to technology
Concept, to accelerate change, fearfulof being left
momentum. behind.
Make major acquisitionsafter Make major acquisitionsbefore
breakthrough(ifat all) to breakthrough,in a doomed
accelerate momentum. attempt to create momentum.
Spend little energytryingto Spend a lot of energy trying to
motivate or align people; the align and motivatepeople, rally
momentum of the flywheel is ing them around new visions.
infectious.184 Jim Collins
Signs That You're on the Flywheel Signs That You're in the Doom Loop
(Good-to-GreatCompanies) (Comparison Companies)
Let results do most of the Sellthe future, tocompensate
talking. for lack of results.
Maintain consistencyover Demonstrate inconsistencyover
time; each generationbuilds time; each newleaderbringsa
on the work ofpreviousgener radicalnewpath; the flywheel
ations; the flywheelcontinues grindsto a halt, and the doom
to build momentum. loopbeginsanew.
It allstarts with Level 5 leaders,who naturallygravitatetoward the fly
wheel model.They'reless interestedin flashy programsthat make it look
like they are Leading! with a capital L. They're more interestedin the
quiet, deliberateprocess of pushingon the flywheel to produceResults!
with a capitalR.
Gettingthe rightpeopleon thebus, the wrong peopleoffthe bus, and
the rightpeople in the rightseats—theseare all crucialsteps in the early
stages ofbuildup,very importantpusheson theflywheel.Equallyimpor
tant is to rememberthe StockdaleParadox:"We'renot goingto hitbreak
throughby Christmas,but ifwe keep pushingin the right direction,we
will eventuallyhit breakthrough."This processof confrontingthe brutal
facts helpsyousee the obvious,albeitdifficult,stepsthat must be taken to
turn the flywheel. Faith in the endgame helps you live through the
monthsor years ofbuildup.
Next, when you attain deep understandingabout the three circles of
your HedgehogConcept and begin to push in a directionconsistentwith
that understanding,youhit breakthroughmomentum andacceleratewith
key accelerators,chief among them pioneeringthe application of tech
nologytied directlybackto yourthree circles.Ultimately,to reach break
through means having the disciplineto make a series of good decisions
consistentwith your HedgehogConcept—disciplinedaction, following
from disciplined people who exercise disciplined thought. That's it.
That's the essenceof thebreakthroughprocess.
In short, if you diligentlyand successfullyapply each concept in the
framework,and you continueto push in aconsistentdirectionon the fly
wheel, accumulatingmomentum step by step and turn by turn, youwillGood to Great 185
eventuallyreach breakthrough.It might not happentoday, or tomorrow,
or nextweek. It might not evenhappen nextyear. But itwillhappen.
Andwhen it does, you will face an entirelynewset of challenges:how
to acceleratemomentum inresponseto ever-risingexpectations,and how
to ensure that theflywheelcontinuesto turn longinto thefuture. In short,
yourchallengewill no longerbe how to gofrom good to great,but howto
gofrom greatto enduringgreat.And that isthe subjectofthe lastchapter.T H E F LY.W;H EEL AND THE DOOM L 6 0>
.:. ;/ KEY POINTS ":"..•>..*•;. .\;';..,
• Qoqd-to-greattransformationsoftenlooklike dramatic,'reyblutiort
;ity events to those obseiviftgfrom the outside,but they feel like
organic,cumulativeprocessesto peopleon the inside.The confu
sion ofend outcomes(dramaticresults)with process(organicand
cumulative)skews our perceptionof what really works over the
longhaul.
• No matterhowdramaticthe end result,the good-to-greattransfor
mations never happened in one fell swoop. There was no single.
definingaction, no grand program, no one killer innovation,no
solitaryluckybreak,no miraclemoment.
• Sustainabletransformationsfollowa predictablepatternofbuildup
and breakthrough.Likepushingon agiant,heavyflywheel,it take$
a lot ofeffortto getthe thingmovingat all,but withpersistentpush
ing ina consistentdirectionoveralongperiodoftime,theflywheel
buildsmomentum,eventuallyhittinga pointofbreakthrough.
• The comparisoncompaniesfolloweda differentpattern,the doom
loop. Ratherthan accumulatingmomentum—turnby turn of the
flywheel—theytried to skip buildup and jump immediatelyto
breakthrough.Then, with disappointingresults,they'd lurch back
and forth,failingto maintaina consistentdirection.
• The comparison companies frequently tried to create a break
throughwith large,misguidedacquisitions.The gbbd-to-greatcom
panies,, in contrast, principally usedMarge acquisitions after
breakthrough,to acceleratemomentumin analreadyfast-sjpinnmg
flywheel.
UNEXPECTED RESULTS,
• Those inside the good-to-greatcompanieswere often unaware of.
the magnitudeoftheirtransformationatthe time;onlylater,in ret
rospect,did it become clear. They had noname, tag line^ launch
event,or programto signifywhatthey were doingat the time.Good to Great 187
The good-to-greatleadersspentessentiallyno energytryingto "cre
ate alignment,""motivatethe troops/' or"managechange."Under
the right conditions,the problems of commitment, alignment,
motivation,and changelargelytake careof themselves.Alignment
principallyfollowsfrom resultsand momentum, not the otherway
around.
The short-termpressuresofWall Streetwere not inconsistentwith
followingthis model. The flywheel effect is not in conflict with
these pressures.Indeed, it isthe key to managingthem.CH A P„ IE R
FirstWho. .. Confrgnt the Wi^jBHO^ ^Cuiinj#OF.T^BNOLOGY
LeadershJp Then What Bjin^fftgre-.1* ^jjjjfjjg,fryi^^fcA^CELERATORS
It isyour Work in life that is the ultimate seduction.
— Pablo Picasso1
\r. '€; hen webeganthe Good to Greatresearchproject,we confronted
a dilemma: How should we think about the ideas in Built to Last while
doing the Good toGreatresearch?
Briefly,BuilttoLast, based on a six-yearresearchproject conducted at
StanfordBusinessSchoolin theearly 1990s,answeredthe question,What
does it take to startand buildan enduringgreatcompanyfrom the ground
up? Myresearchmentor and coauthorJerry I. Porras and I studied eigh
teen enduring great companies—institutionsthat stood the test of time,
tracingtheir foundingin some cases back to the 1800s, while becoming
the iconic great companies of the late twentieth century. We examined
companieslike Procter & Gamble(foundedin 1837),American Express
(founded in 1850), Johnson & Johnson (founded in 1886), and GE
(founded in 1892).One of the companies,Citicorp (now Citigroup),was
founded in 1812, the same year Napoleon marched into Moscow! The
"youngest"companies in the studywereWal-Martand Sony, which trace
their originsbackto 1945. Similarto thisbook,we used direct comparisonGood to Great 189
companies—3M versus Norton, Walt Disney versus Columbia Pictures,
Marriott versus Howard Johnson, and soforth—foreighteen paired com
parisons.In short, we sought toidentifythe essentialdistinctions between
great companies and goodcompaniesas they endure overdecades, even
centuries.
When I had the first summer researchteam assembledfor the good-to-
great project, I asked, "What should be the role oi Built toLast in doing
this study?"
"I don't think it should playany role," said BrianBagley. "I didn't join
this team to do a derivativepiece of work."
"Neither did I," added Alyson Sinclair. "I'm excited about a new pro
ject and a new question. It wouldn't be very fulfilling to just fill in the
pieces of your other book."
"But wait a minute," I responded. "We spent six years on the previous
study.It might be helpful tobuildon our previouswork."
"I seem to recall that you got the idea for this studywhen aMcKinsey
partner said thatBuiltto Lastdidn't answerthe question of how to change
a good company into a great one," noted Paul Weissman. "What if the
answers are different?"
Back and forth, to and fro, the debate continued for a few weeks. Then
StefanieJudd weighedin with the argument thatswayed me. "I love the
ideas in Built to Lastand that's what worries me," she said. "I'm afraid that
if we start withBTL as the frame ofreference,we'll just go around in cir
cles, provingour own biases." It became clear that there would be sub
stantiallyless risk in startingfrom scratch,settingout to discoverwhat we
would, whether it matched previouswork or not.
rEarly in the resiesirchfthen,we made a very important decision. We
decided to cbnduet the research for Good to Great as if Built to Last
, ;didn't exist.This was the only way to clearly see the key factors in
^^ minimalbias,from
^^^^A^^ri^, ^hepi.j,Wecould returntp4sk»"How, if atall, do thetwp
K'^udi^^iate?,>:;>iv * ••*• '..-••:-: v ~- . .'•";-•,•', -.v''
Now, five years later, with this book complete, we can stand back to
look at the two works in the context of each other. Surveyingacross the
twostudies,I offerthe followingfour conclusions:190 Jim Collins
1.When I consider the enduring great companies from Built to Last,
I now see substantial evidence that their early leaders followed the
good-to-greatframework.The onlyreal differenceis that they did so as
entrepreneurs in small, early-stage enterprises trying to get off the
ground,ratherthan asCEOs tryingto transformestablishedcompanies
from good togreat.
2. In an ironic twist, I now see Good to Great not as a sequel to Built to
Last, but asa prequel.Applythe findingsin thisbookto createsustained
greatresults,asa start-upor anestablishedorganization,and then apply
the findingsin Builtto Lasttogo from greatresultsto an enduringgreat
company.
Established Good to Sustained Builtto Enduring
Company + Great -» Great + Last —> Great
orStart-up Concepts Results Concepts Company
3.To make the shift from a companywith sustainedgreat results to an
enduring great company of iconic stature, apply the central concept
from BuilttoLast: Discoveryour corevaluesand purpose beyond just
making money (coreideology)and combine this with the dynamic of
preservethe core/stimulateprogress.
4. A tremendous resonance existsbetween the two studies; the ideas from
each enrich and inform the ideas in the other. In particular, Good to
Great answers a fundamental question raised, but not answered, in
Built to Last: What is the differencebetween a "good" BHAG (Big
HairyAudacious Goal) and a "bad" BHAG?
GOOD TO GREAT IN THE EARLY STAGES
OF BU I LT TO LAST
Lookingbackon the BuilttoLaststudy,it appearsthat the enduring great
companiesdid in fact go through a process of buildup to breakthrough,
followingthe good-to-greatframeworkduring theirformativeyears.
Consider, for example, the buildup-breakthroughflywheel pattern in
the evolution of Wal-Mart. Most people think that Sam Walton just
exploded onto the scene with his visionaryidea for rural discount retail
ing, hittingbreakthroughalmostasa start-upcompany.But nothing could
be further from the truth.Good to Great 191
SamWaltonbeganin 1945 with a singledimestore.He didn't open his
second store until seven years later. Walton built incrementally, step by
step, turn by turn of the flywheel, until the HedgehogConcept of large
discount marts popped out as a natural evolutionarystep in the mid-
1960s. It tookWaltona quarterofa centuryto grow from that singledime
store to a chain of 38 Wal-Marts. Then, from 1970 to 2000, Wal-Mart hit
breakthroughmomentum and exploded to over 3,000 stores with over
$150 billion (yes, billion) in revenues.2Just like thestory of the chicken
jumpingout of the egg that we discussedin the flywheel chapter,Wal-
Mart had been incubatingfor decades before the egg cracked open. As
Sam Walton himself wrote:
Somehow over the years people have gotten the impressionthat Wal-
Mart was . . . just this great idea that turned into anovernightsuccess.
But... it was an outgrowth of everything we'd been doing since
[1945]... . And like mostovernightsuccesses,it was about twentyyears
in the making.3
If there everwas a classiccase of buildup leading to aHedgehogCon
cept, followedby breakthroughmomentum in the flywheel,Wal-Martis
it. The only difference is that Sam Walton followed the model as an
entrepreneurbuildinga great companyfrom the ground up, rather than
as a CEO transformingan establishedcompanyfrom good to great. But
it's the same basic idea.4
Hewlett-Packardprovides another excellent example of the good-to-
great ideas at work in the formativestagesofa BuilttoLast company.For
instance, Bill Hewlett and David Packard'sentire founding concept for
HP was not what, but who—startingwith each other. They'd been best
friends in graduate school and simply wanted to build a great company
togetherthat wouldattractother peoplewith similarvaluesand standards.
The founding minutes oftheirfirst meetingon August23, 1937,begin by
statingthat they woulddesign,manufacture,and sellproductsin the elec
tricalengineering fields,very broadlydefined.But then thosesame found
ing minutes go on to say, "The question of what to manufacture was
postponed.. . ."5
Hewlett and Packard stumbled around for months trying to come up
with something,anything,that would get the companyout of the garage.
They consideredyacht transmitters,air-conditioningcontrol devices,med
ical devices, phonograph amplifiers,you name it. They built electronic192 Jim Collins
Buildup-Breakthrough Flywheel at Wal-Mart
Number of Stores 1945,1970, 1990, 2000
2000: 3,151 Stores.,
3,000
2,000
1990:1,528 Stores
1,000
1945:1 Store 1970:38 Stores
0-= "
Buildup... Breakthrough!
bowlingalleysensors,a clock-drivefor a telescope,andan electronicshock
jigglemachinetohelp overweightpeoplelose weight.Itdidn'treallymat
ter what the companymade in the very early days, as long as it made a
technical contribution and would enable Hewlett and Packard to build a
companytogetherandwith otherlike-mindedpeople.6Itwas the ultimate
"firstwho ... then what"start-up.
Later,as Hewlettand Packardscaledup, they stayedtrue tothe guiding
principle of "firstwho." AfterWorld War II, even as revenues shrank with
the end of theirwartime contracts,they hired a whole batch of fabulous
peoplestreamingoutofgovernmentlabs,with nothingspecificin mindfor
them to do. Recall Packard'sLaw, which we citedin chapter3: "No com
pany can grow revenuesconsistentlyfasterthan its abilityto getenoughof
the right people to implementthat growth and still become a great com
pany."Hewlettand Packardlived andbreathedthis conceptand obtained
a surplusofgreatpeoplewhenevertheopportunitypresenteditself.
Hewlett and Packard were themselvesconsummate Level 5 leaders,
first as entrepreneursand later ascompanybuilders.Years after HP had
establisheditselfas one of themost importanttechnologycompaniesin
the world, Hewlettmaintaineda remarkablepersonalhumility.In 1972,
HP vice president Barney Oliver wrote in a recommendation letter to the
IEEE Awards Board for the Founders Award:Good to Great 193
While our success has been gratifying,it has not spoiled our founders.
Only recently, at an executive council meeting, Hewlett remarked:
"Look, weVe grown because the industrygrew. We were lucky enough
to be sitting on the nose when the rocket took off. We don't deserve a
damn bit of credit." After a moment's silence, while everyonedigested
this humbling comment, Packard said: "Well, Bill, at least we didn't
louse it upcompletely."7
Shortlybefore his death, I had theopportunityto meet Dave Packard.
Despite being one of Silicon Valley'sfirst self-madebillionaires, he lived
in the same small house that he and his wife built for themselves in 1957,
overlookinga simple orchard.The tiny kitchen, with its dated linoleum,
and the simply furnished living room bespoke a man who needed no
material symbols to proclaim "I'm a billionaire. I'm important. I'm suc
cessful." "His idea of a good time," said Bill Terry, who worked with
Packard for thirty-sixyears, "was to get some of his friends together to
stringsome barbedwire/'8Packardbequeathedhis$5.6 billionestateto a
charitablefoundationand, upon his death, his family created a eulogy
pamphlet, witha photo ofhim sittingon a tractorin farmingclothes.The
caption made no reference to his stature as one of the greatindustrialists
of the twentieth century.9 It simply read: "David Packard, 1912-1996,
Rancher, etc." Level 5, indeed.
CORE IDEOLOGY: THE EXTRA DIMENSION OF
ENDURING GREATNESS
During our interview with Bill Hewlett, we asked him what he was most
proud of in his long career. "As I look back on my life's work," he said,
"I'm probably most proud of having helped create a company that by
virtue of itsvalues,practices,and successhas had a tremendous impact on
the way companiesare managedaround the world."10The "HP Way," as
it became known, reflected a deeply held set of core values that distin
guished the company more than any of its products. These values
included technical contribution, respectfor the individual,responsibility
to the communities in which the company operates,and a deeply held
beliefthat profitisnotthe fundamentalgoal of acompany.These princi
ples,while fairlystandardtoday,were radicaland progressivein the 1950s.
David Packard said of businessmen from those days, "While they were194 Jim Collins
reasonablypolite in their disagreement,it was quite evident that they
firmly believedthat Iwas not one ofthem, and obviouslynot qualifiedto
managean importantenterprise."11
Hewlett and Packard exemplifya key "extra dimension" that helped
elevatetheir companyto the elitestatusof an enduringgreatcompany,a
vital dimension for making the transitionfrom good to great to built to
last. That extra dimensionis a guidingphilosophyor a "core ideology,"
which consistsofcore valuesand acore purpose(reasonfor beingbeyond
just makingmoney).These resemblethe principles in the Declaration of
Independence ("We hold these truths to be self-evident")—neverper
fectlyfollowed,but alwayspresentasan inspiringstandardand ananswer
to the question ofwhy it is importantthat weexist.
essential torlife, bu^'*•><*- rV ?*"<" ..'" J?1- *i*^^r"^^*<!^?^.^*,**n«JS>T5^vy;'5jfef^"^g"^^i;
Wewrote in Builtto LastaboutMerck'sdecisionto developand distrib
ute a drug that cured river blindness.This painful diseaseafflictedovera
millionpeoplewith parasiticworms thatswarm throughthe eyes to cause
blindness.Because those who had the disease—tribalpeople in remote
placeslikethe Amazon—hadno money,Merckinitiatedthe creationofan
independentdistributionsystemtogetthe drugtoremotevillagesandgave
the drugaway free to millionsofpeoplearoundthe world.12
To be clear, Merck is not acharityorganization,nor does it view itself
as such. Indeed, it has consistentlyoutperformedthe marketas a highly
profitablecompany,growingtonearly$6billionin profitsandbeatingthe
market by over ten timesfrom 1946 to 2000. Yet, despite its remarkable
financialperformance,Merck does not view its ultimatereasonfor being
asmakingmoney.In 1950,GeorgeMerck2d,sonofthe founder,setforth
his company'sphilosophy:
We try to remember that medicine is for thepatient.... It is not for the
piofits. The profitsfollow, and if we have remembered that, they have
never failed to appear. The better we have rememberedit, the larger
they havebeen.13Good to Great 195
An important caveat to the concept of core values is that there are no
specific "right" core values for becoming an enduring great company.
No matter what core value you propose, we found an enduring great
company that does not have that specific core value. A company need
not have passion for its customers (Sonydidn't), or respect for the indi
vidual (Disney didn't), or quality (Wal-Martdidn't), or social responsi
bility (Ford didn't) in order to become enduring and great. This was
one of the mostparadoxicalfindingsfrom Builtto Last—corevaluesare
essentialfor enduringgreatness,but it doesntseem to matterwhatthose
core valuesare. The point is not what core values you have, butthatyou
have core values at all, that you know what they are, that you build
them explicitlyinto the organization,and that you preserve them over
time.
This notion of preservingyour core ideology is a central feature of
enduring greatcompanies.The obviousquestionis,Howdo you preserve
the coreand yetadaptto a changingworld?The answer:Embracethe key
conceptof preservethe core/stimulateprogress.
\fyEnsuringgqeaj ebmpanres.preserve their core values and purpose
^r^hMifr_tti^frv&vf§|n^s''strate^fa^.and operating practices endlessly
:--adftptto a changingWorld This is litemdgidal combinationof apre-
^;sj#jye^hereoreOT^
The storyofWalt Disneyexemplifiesthis duality.In 1923,an energetic
twenty-one-year-oldanimatormovedfrom KansasCityto Los Angelesand
triedto geta jobin the moviebusiness.No film companywouldhire him,
so he used his meager savings to rent a camera, set up a studio in his
uncle'sgarage,and beginmakinganimatedcartoons.In 1934,Mr. Disney
took the boldstep, neverbeforetaken,to createsuccessfulfull-lengthani
mated feature films, including Snow White, Pinocchio, Fantasia, and
Bambi. In the 1950s, Disney moved into television with the Mickey
Mouse Club. Also in the 1950s,Walt Disneypaid a fatefulvisitto a num
ber of amusementparks and came away disgusted,callingthem "dirty,
phony places, run by tough-lookingpeople."14He decided that Disney
could build something much better, perhaps even the best in the world,
and the company launched a whole new business in theme parks, first
with Disneylandand later with WaltDisneyWorld and EPCOT Center.196 Jim Collins
Over time, Disneytheme parkshavebecome a cornerstone experience for
many familiesfrom all overthe world.
Throughout all these dramatic changes—fromcartoons to full-length
feature animation, from the Mickey Mouse Club to Disney World-—the
companyheld firmly to a consistentset of corevalues that included pas
sionate belief in creative imagination,fanatic attention to detail, abhor
rence of cynicism, and preservationof the "Disney Magic." Mr. Disney
alsoinstilleda remarkable constancyofpurposethat permeated everynew
Disney venture—namely,to bring happinessto millions, especiallychil
dren. This purpose cut across national bordersand has endured through
time. When my wife and I visited Israel in 1995, we met the man who
broughtDisney productsto the MiddleEast. "The wholeidea,"he told us
with pride, "is to bring a smile to a child'sface. That's really important
here, wherethere aren't enoughsmileson the children."WaltDisneypro
vides a classiccase ofpreservethe core andstimulateprogress,holding a
core ideologyfixed while changingstrategiesand practicesovertime, and
its adherence to this principle is the fundamental reason why it has
endured as a great company.PRESERVE
Passion for creative ima '
Fanatic attention to detail
Abhorrence of cynicism
The "Disney Magic"
Bring happiness to millions
Good to Great 197
CHANGE
1920s: Cartoons
1930s: Full-length feature animation
1950s: Television, Mickey Mouse Cluby
1960s: Theme parks
1980s: International
1990s: Cruise Line
Preservethe Core/StimulateProgressatWalt DisneyCompany,
1920s-1990s
GOOD BHAGS, BAD BHAGS, AND OTHER
CONCEPTUAL LINKS
In the table on page 198, IVe outlined a sketch of conceptual links
between the two studies. As a general pattern, the Good-to-Greatideas
appear to lay thegroundworkfor the ultimatesuccessof the Built toLast
ideas. Ilike to thinkofGood to Greatas providingthe core ideasfor getting
a flywheelturningfrom buildupthroughbreakthrough,whileBuiltto Last
outlinesthe core ideas for keeping a flywheel acceleratinglong into the
future and elevatinga companyto iconicstature.You will noticein exam
ining the table thateach ofthe Good-to-Greatfindingsenablesall four of
the key ideasfrom Builtto Last. To brieflyreview,those four key ideasare:
1. Clock Building, Not Time Telling. Build an organizationthat can
endureand adaptthroughmultiplegenerationsofleadersand multiple
productlife cycles; the exact opposite of being built around a single
greatleader or asinglegreatidea.198 Jim Collins
2. GeniusofAND. Embrace both extremeson a number of dimensions at
the same time. Insteadof choosingA OR B, figure out how to have A
AND B—purposeANDprofit,continuityAND change,freedomAND
responsibility,etc. -
3. Core Ideology. Instill core values (essentialand enduringtenets) and
core purpose (fundamental reason for being beyond just making
money) asprinciplesto guide decisionsand inspirepeoplethroughout
the organizationover a longperiodoftime.
4. Preserve the Core/StimulateProgress. Preservethe core ideologyas an
anchorpointwhile stimulatingchange,improvement,innovation,and
renewalin everythingelse. Changepracticesand strategieswhile hold
ing core values and purposefixed. Setand achieveBHAGs consistent
with the coreideology.
FROM GOOD TO GREATW BUILT TO LAST:
CJLU££I1UJLJLULU
Concepts in
Good to Great
Level5 Leadership
Relationshipto Concepts in
Built to Last*
ClockBuilding,Not Time Telling:Level 5
leadersbuild acompanythat can tick along
withoutthem, rather than feeding their
egos bybecomingindispensable.
GeniusofAND: Personalhumility AND
professionalwill.
Core Ideology:Level 5leadersare ambi
tiousforthe companyand what itstands
for; theyhave a sense ofpurposebeyond
their own success.
Preservethe Core/StimulateProgress:
Level 5 leadersare relentlessin stimulating
progresstowardtangibleresultsand
achievement,even if it meansfiringtheir
brothers.Concepts in
Soot to Great
First Who ... Then What
Confront the Brutal Facts
(StockdaleParadox)
Good to Great 199
Relationshipto Concepts in
Built to Last*
ClockBuilding,Not Time Telling:Prac
ticing"firstwho" isclock building;practic
ing"firstwhat" (settingstrategyfirst) istime
telling.
GeniusofAND: Get the rightpeopleon
the busAND the wrongpeople offthe bus.
Core Ideology:Practicing"firstwho"
means selectingpeople more on their fit
with the corevaluesand purposethan on
theirskillsand knowledge.
PreservetheCore/StimulateProgress:
Practicing"firstwho" meansa bias for pro
moting from within, which reinforces the
core values.
ClockBuilding,NotTime Telling:
Creating a climate where the truth is
heard isclockbuilding,especiallyifyou
create redflag mechanisms.
Genius ofAND: Confront the brutal facts
ofyourcurrent realityAND retain unwa
veringfaith that youwill prevailin the
end—the Stockdale Paradox.
Core Ideology:Confrontingthe brutalfacts
clarifiesthevaluesan organizationtruly
holds as core versus those that it would like
to hold as core.
PreservetheCore/StimulateProgress:Bru
tal facts clarifywhat must be done to stimu
late progress.200 Jim Collins
Concepts in
Good to Great
HedgehogConcept
(The Three Circles)
CultureofDiscipline
Relationshipto Concepts in
Built to Last*
ClockBuilding,Not TimeTelling:
The Council mechanism is consum
mate clockbuilding.
GeniusofAND: Deep understanding
AND incredible simplicity.
Core Ideology:The "whatyou are passion
ate about"circle overlapsnicelywith core
valuesand purpose.Onlythose values
aboutwhichyouare so passionatethat you
wouldnever,under any conditions,give
them up qualifyas trulycore.
Preservethe Core/StimulateProgress:
Good BHAGsflow from understanding;
bad BHAGs flow from bravado. Great
BHAGssitright smackin the middleofthe
three circles.
ClockBuilding,Not TimeTelling:Oper
atingthroughsheerforce ofpersonalityasa
disciplinarianistime telling;buildingan
enduringcultureof disciplineisclock
building.
GeniusofAND: Freedom AND responsi
bility.
Core Ideology:Aculture ofdiscipline
ejects those who do not share the values
and standardsof an organization.
Preservethe Core/StimulateProgress:
When youhave a culture ofdiscipline,you
can give peoplemorefreedomto experi
ment and find their own best path to
results.Concepts in
Good to Great
Technology
Accelerators
Flywheel,Not
Doom Loop
Good to Great 201
Relationshipto Concepts in
Built to Last*
Clock Building,Not Time Telling:
Technologyacceleratorsare akey part of
the clock.
GeniusofAND: Shun"technologyfads
ANDpioneerthe applicationoftechnology.
Core Ideology:In a greatcompany,tech
nologyissubservientto core values,not the
other way around.
Preservethe Core/StimulateProgress:The
righttechnologiesacceleratemomentum
in the flywheel,towardthe achievement of
BHAGs.
ClockBuilding,Not TimeTelling:
The flywheeleffectcreates the sus
tainedbuildingofmomentum,and doesnot
dependon the presenceofa charismatic
visionaryto motivatepeople.
GeniusofAND: Evolutionary,incremental
processAND revolutionary,dramaticresults.
Core Ideology:The doom loopmakes it
almostimpossibleto instillcore valuesand
purpose,as people chronicallywonder,
"Who are we? What do we stand for?"
Preservethe Core/StimulateProgress:The
smoothconsistencyofthe flywheeland the
cumulativebuilding of momentum to a
point ofbreakthroughcreate the perfect
conditionsforinstillingcorevalueswhile
stimulatingchangeand progress.
* See Built to Last: SuccessfulHabits of Visionary Companies, Collins and
Porras, HarperBusiness, 1994.202 ]im Collins
I am not going to belabor all the links from the above table, but I
would like to highlight one particularlypowerfullink: the connection
between BHAGs and the three circles of the Hedgehog Concept. In
Built to Last, we identified BHAGs as a key way to stimulate progress
while preservingthe core.A BHAG (pronouncedbee-hag,short for "Big
HairyAudaciousGoal") is a huge and dauntinggoal—likea big moun
tain to climb. It is clear, compelling,and people "get it" right away. A
BHAG serves as a unifyingfocal point ofeffort,galvanizingpeople and
creating team spiritas peoplestrive toward a finish line. Like the 1960s
NASA moon mission, a BHAG captures the imagination and grabs peo
ple in the gut.
However, as exciting as BHAGs are, we left a vital question unan
swered. What is thedifferencebetweena bad BHAG and a goodBHAG?
Swimmingfrom Australiato New Zealandwould be a BHAGforme, but
it would also kill me! We can nowofferan answerto that question, draw
ing directlyfrom the studyofgood-to-greatcompanies.
Asuperbexampleofthis comesfrom Boeingin the1950s.Untilthe early
1950s,Boeingfocusedon buildinghuge flyingmachinesfor the military—
the B-17 FlyingFortress,the B-29 Superfortress,and theB-52 intercontinen
tal jetbomberStratofortress.15However,Boeinghadvirtuallyno presencein
the commercial aircraftmarket,and the airlinesshowedno interest in buy
ing aircraftfrom Boeing. ("You make great bombers up there in Seattle.
Why don't you just stick with that," they said in response to Boeing's
inquiries.)Today,we take for grantedthatmostairtraveltakesplaceon Boe
ing jets,butin 1952,almostno one outsidethe militaryflew onBoeing.16
Wisely,throughthe 1940s, Boeinghad stayedaway from the commer
cial sphere, an arena in which McDonnellDouglas had vastly superior
abilities in the smaller, propeller-drivenplanes that composed the com
mercialfleet.17In the early 1950s,however,Boeingsaw an opportunityto
leapfrogMcDonnell Douglas by marryingits experiencewith large air-Good to Great 203
" Includes your core values and purpose
craft to its understandingof jetengines. Led by aLevel 5 leader named
BillAllen,Boeingexecutivesdebatedthewisdomofmovinginto thecom
mercialsphere.Theycame to understandthat, whereasBoeingcould not
have been the bestcommercialplanemakera decadeearlier,the cumula
tive experiencein jets and bigplanesthey had gained from militarycon
tracts now made such a dream possible.They also came to see that the
economicsofcommercialaircraftwould be vastlysuperiorto themilitary
marketand—ofno small importance—theywere just flat-outturned on
bythe whole ideaof buildinga commercialjet.
So, in 1952,Bill Allenandhis team made thedecisiontospenda quar
terofthe company'sentirenetworth tobuilda prototypejetthat couldbe
used for commercialaviation.18They builtthe 707 and launchedBoeing
on a bid to become the leading commercialaviation company in the
world. Three decades later, after producingfive of the most successful
commercialjets in history(the 707, 727,737, 747, and757),Boeingstood
as the absolute,unquestionedgreatestcompany in the commercialair
plane industry, worldwide.19 Not until the late 1990s would Boeings
numberonepositionbeseriouslychallenged,andit would take a govern
ment consortium in the form of Airbus to do it.20204 Jim Collins
Hereisthe key point:Boeings BHAG,whilehugeand daunting,was not
any random goal. It was a goal that made sense within the contextof the
threecircles.Boeingsexecutivesunderstoodwith calm,equanimitythat(1)
the companycould become the best in the world at commercialjet manu
facturingeven thoughit had nopresencein themarket,(2) the shiftwould
significantlyimprove Boeings economicsby increasingprofit per aircraft
model,and (3) the Boeingpeoplewere very passionateaboutthe idea. Boe
ing actedwith understanding,notbravado,atthis pivotalmomentin its his
tory, and thatisone ofthe key reasonswhy it enduredasa greatcompany.
/BijiBt^ aJ*ey point;Jo,j^Df^'flW^c^^.^:
requires,oiWh^^ hand, staying squardy^withintile three circles:
;.whllefcon t^^ert hartd,B^g^vy|lfngtolch&ngeifyespecific:tpanrf§$-
tationMwfiat% fnsicte,the three circlesat anygive^nhomeritBoeing.
, in 1,952 neVer leftthe,#ree chiefs'.o^ibahdoneidte.c^r^'iaec^Qa^.
But itjereatedan excitrngnew BMAG arid adjustedits HedgehogCorf
.tept%oinclude(qommerctelaircraft. « .[rt '•, -f, *-/!;:.-
The three circle/BHAGframework provides one powerful example of
howthe ideasfrom the two studieslinktogether,and I'dlike to offerit here
as a practicaltool for creatingthis linkwithinyour own organization.Yet it
alonewill not make your companygreatandlasting.To createan enduring
greatcompanyrequiresallthe key conceptsfrom bothstudies,tied together
and appliedconsistentlyover time. Furthermore,ifyou ever stop doing any
one ofthe key ideas, your organizationwill inevitablyslide backwardtoward
mediocrity.Remember,it is much easier to become great than to remain
great. Ultimately,the consistentapplicationofboth studies,one building
upon the other,givesthebestchancefor creatinggreatnessthatlasts.
WHY GREATN ESS?
Duringa breakat aseminarthatI gave to agroup ofmy ex-studentsfrom
Stanford,one came up to me,brow furrowed."MaybePm justnot ambi
tious enough,"he said. "ButI don'treallywantto builda hugecompany.
Is there something wrongwith that?"
"Notat all," I replied."Greatnessdoesn'tdependon size."I then toldhimGood to Great 205
aboutSina Simantob,who runs the buildingwhere I have my researchlab
oratory.Sina has createda truly great institution.It's an old 1892 redbrick
schoolbuildingthat has been renovatedinto the most extraordinaryspace,
decoratedand maintainedwith tremendousattentionto detail, bordering
on perfection.By one definitionofresults—attractingthe most interesting
people in Boulder,settinga standard that other local buildingsmeasure
themselvesagainst,and generatingthe highestprofitper foot ofspace—his
small enterpriseis trulya greatinstitutionin my hometown.Simantobhas
neverdefinedgreatnessbysize, and there isnoreasonforhim to.
The studentpausedfor amoment,then said: "Okay,IacceptthatIdon't
need to buildabigcompanyinorderto haveagreatcompany.Butevenso,
why should I try to build a great company?What ifI just want to besuc
cessful?"
The questionbroughtme up short. This was not a lazy person asking;
he'd started his own businessas a young man, put himselfthrough law
school,and after graduateschool becamea driven entrepreneur.He has
remarkableenergy,an intenseand infectiousenthusiasm.Of all the stu
dents I've known over the years, he is one that Ihave little doubt will be
enormouslysuccessful.Yet he questionsthe whole idea oftryingto build
somethinggreatand lasting.
I can offer two answers.
First,I believethatitis no harderto buildsomethinggreatthan tobuild
somethinggood. Itmightbe statisticallymore rare to reach greatness,but
itdoes not requiremoresufferingthan perpetuatingmediocrity.Indeed,if
some of the comparisoncompaniesin our study are any indication,it
involvesless suffering,and perhapseven less work. The beautyand power
ofthe researchfindings is that they can radicallysimplifyour lives while
increasingour effectiveness.There is great solace in the simple fact of
clarity—aboutwhat isvital,and what is not.
%#ed,:i^^^^ potthat we shouldttaddH these
^;#[yfp|s^ anftm^keourselvesevenmore
!t6^%^ resizethat mucivofwhat we'redoing
^i|ff^^ majority*ofour work;
^lirr^ apd pr&tiy much ignored,or
O^^fe^^^Sf %^^tfl!,10^^?^,Q^ liv^would be simpler and. our206 Jim Collins
Letme illustratethis pointwith a nonbusinessexample,thelaststoryof
the book. The coachingstaffofa high schoolcross-countryrunning team
recently got togetherfor dinner after winning its second state champi
onship in two years. The programhad been transformedin the previous
five years from good (top twenty in the state) to great (consistentcon
tendersfor the state championship,onboth the boys' andgirls'teams).
"Idon'tget it," said one ofthe coaches."Whyare we so successful?We
don'twork any harderthan otherteams.And whatwe dois justso simple.
Whydoes it work?"
He was referringtothe HedgehogConceptofthe program,capturedin
the simplestatement:We run best atthe end. We run best at theend of
workouts. We run best at the end of races. And we run best at the end of
the season, when it counts the most. Everythingis geared to this simple
idea,and thecoachingstaffknows how tocreatethis effectbetterthanany
other team in the state. For example, they place a coach at the 2-mile
mark (ofa 3.1-milerace) to collectdata as the runnersgo past. Butunlike
most teams, which collect time splits (minutes-per-milerunning pace),
this team collectsplacesplits(whatplacetherunnersare inas theygo by).
Then the coaches calculate not how fast the runners go, but how many
competitorsthey pass atthe end ofthe race, from mile 2to the finish.They
then use this data to award "head bones" after each race. (Head bones are
beadsin theshapeofshrunkenskulls,whichthekids make into necklaces
and bracelets,symbolizingtheirvanquishedcompetitors.)The kids learn
how to pace themselves,and race with confidence:"We run best at the
end,"theythinkattheendofa hard race. "So, ifI'm hurtingbad, thenmy
competitorsmusthurt a wholelotworse!"
Ofequal importanceis what they don'twaste energyon. For example,
when the head coach took over the program,she found herselfburdened
with expectationsto do "funprograms"and "rah-rahstuff"to motivatethe
kids and keep them interested—parties,and special trips, and shopping
adventuresto Nike outlets,and inspirationalspeeches.Shequicklyput an
end to nearly all that distracting(and time-consuming)activity."Look,"
she said,"thisprogramwill bebuiltonthe idea thatrunningis fun, racing
is fun, improvingis fun, and winningis fun. Ifyou'renotpassionateabout
what we do here, then go find somethingelse to do." The result: The
numberofkids in the programnearlytripledin five years, from thirtyto
eighty-two.
Before the boys' team won the first-everstate cross-countrychampi
onship in the school'shistory,she didn't explicitlyset thegoal or try toGood to Great 207
"motivate"the kids toward it. Instead,she let the kids gain momentum,
seeingfor themselves—raceby race, week by week—thatthey could beat
anyone in the state. Then, one day out ona trainingrun, one boy said to
his teammates,"Hey, I think we could win state.""Yeah, I thinkso, too,"
said another. Everyone kept running, the goal quietly understood.The
coachingstaffnever once mentionedthe state championshipidea until
thekids saw for themselvesthatthey coulddoit.
This created the strongestculture ofdisciplinepossible,as the seven
varsity runners felt personallyresponsiblefor winning state—a commit
ment made not to the coaches, buttoeach other. One team member even
called all ofhis teammatesthe night before the state race, just to make
sure they were all gettingreadyfor bed early. (No need for the coachesto
be disciplinarianson this team.) Hammeringthroughthe last mile, pass
ing competitors("We run best at the end!"), each kid hurt, but knew it
would hurt a lot more ifhe had to look his teammatesin the eyes as the
only one who failed to come through.No one failed, and the team beat
everyotherteam atthe state meetby a large margin.
The head coach began rebuildingthe whole programaround the idea
of"firstwho." One ofthe assistantcoaches is a 300-poundex-shot-putter
(hardlythe image ofa lean distancerunner),but he is withoutquestion
the rightwho: He sharesthe valuesand has the traitsneededto help build
a greatteam. As the programbuilt momentum, itattractedmore kids and
more greatcoaches.Peoplewant to be partofthis spinningflywheel;they
wantto be partofachampionshipteam;theywantto be partofafirst-class
culture. When the cross-countryteam posts yet another championship
bannerin the gym, more kids sign up, the gene pool deepens,the team
gets faster, which produces more championships,which attracts more
kids, which createseven fasterteams,and so forth andso on, in theinfec
tious flywheeleffect.
Are thesecoachessufferingmore than otherteamsto createagreatpro
gram?Are theyworkingharder?No! In fact, all theassistantcoacheshave
full-time professional jobs outside of coaching—engineers,computer
technicians,teachers—andthey work for essentiallyno pay, carvingpre
cious time out oftheir busy lives to be part ofbuildinga great program.
They're just focusing on the right things, and not the wrong things.
They're doing virtually everythingwe write about in this book, within
theirspecificsituation,and not wastingtime on anythingthat doesn'tfit.
Simple,clean,straightforward,elegant—anda heck ofa lotof fun.
The pointofthis storyis thatthese ideaswork. When you applythem in208 Jim Collins
any situation, they make your life and your experience better, while
improvingresults.And along the way, you just might make what you're
buildinggreat. So, I ask again: If it's no harder (given these ideas), the
resultsbetter,and theprocesssomuch more fun—well,why wouldn'tyou
gofor greatness?
Tobe clear,I amnot suggestingthatgoingfrom good togreatiseasy, or
that everyorganizationwill successfullymake theshift. By definition,it is
not possiblefor everyoneto be aboveaverage.ButIam assertingthatthose
who strive to turn good into great find the process no more painful or
exhaustingthan those who settle for just lettingthings wallow along in
mind-numbingmediocrity.Yes, turninggood into greattakes energy,but
the buildingofmomentumadds more energyback into the pool than it
takesout. Conversely,perpetuatingmediocrityis an inherentlydepressing
processand drainsmuch more energyout ofthe pool than itputs back in.
Butthere isa secondanswerto thequestionofwhy greatness,one that
is at thevery heartofwhat motivatedus to undertakethis huge projectin
the first place: the search for meaning,or more precisely,the search for
meaningfulwork.
I asked the head coach ofthe cross-countryprogramwhy she felt com
pelled to make it great. She paused before answering. "That's a really
good question."Long pause. "It's really hard to answer."More pause. "I
guess... it's because I really care about what we're doing. I believe in
runningand the impactit can make on these kids' lives. I want them to
have a greatexperience,and to have the experienceofbeingpartofsome
thingabsolutelyfirst class."
Now for theinterestingtwist:Thecoachhas anMBA from anelitebusi
ness schoolandis a Phi Beta Kappagraduateineconomics,havingwon the
prizefor the best undergraduatehonorsthesisatone ofthe mostselective
universitiesin the world. She found, however,that most of what her class
mateswenton to do—investmentbankingon Wall Street,startingInternet
companies, managementconsulting,working for IBM, or whatever—
held nomeaningfor her. She justdidn'tcare enoughaboutthoseendeav
ors to want to make them great. For her, those jobs held no meaningful
purpose.And so she made the decisionto searchfor meaningfulwork—
work aboutwhichshewouldhave suchpassionthatthe question,Whytry
for greatness?would seem almosttautological.Ifyou're doing something
you care that much about,and you believeinits purposedeeplyenough,
then it isimpossibleto imaginenot tryingtomake itgreat.It'sjusta given.Good to Great 209
I've triedto imaginethe Level 5leadersofthe companieswe'vestudied
answering the question "Why greatness?"Of course, most would say:
"We're not great—wecould be so much better."But pushed to answer,
"Whytry for greatness?"I believetheywould respondmuchlike the cross
country coach. They're doing somethingthey really care about, about
which they have greatpassion.Like Bill Hewlett,they mightcare first and
foremostaboutcreatinga companythatby virtueofits valuesand success
has a tremendousimpactonthe way companiesare managedaroundthe
world. Or like Ken Iverson,they mightfeel a crusader'spurposeto oblit
erate the oppressiveclass hierarchiesthatcause degradationofboth labor
and management.Or like Darwin Smith at Kimberly-Clark,they might
derivea tremendoussense ofpurposefrom the innerquestfor excellence
itself, being driven from within to make anythingthey touch the best it
can be. Or perhapslike Lyle Everinghamat Kroger orCork Walgreenat
Walgreens,they mighthave grown up inthe businessand just reallylove
it. You don'tneed to have some grand existentialreason for why you love
what you're doing or to care deeply about your work (although you
might).All thatmattersis thatyou dolove itandthat you do care.
So, the question of Why greatness?is almost a nonsense question. If
you'reengagedin work that you love and careabout,for whateverreason,
then the questionneeds noanswer.Thequestionis not why, buthow.
Indeed, the Veal question is not, ttWhy greatness?"but "What work
makes you feel compelledto try to creategreatness?"If you have to
ask the question,ftWhy should we try to make it great?Isn't success
enoUgh?":thenyou're probablyengaged in the wrong line of work.
Perhapsyourquesttobe partofbuildingsomethinggreatwill notfall in
yourbusinesslife. Butfind itsomewhere.Ifnot incorporatelife,then per
haps in makingyour churchgreat. Ifnot there,then perhapsa nonprofit,
or a community organization, or a class you teach. Get involved in some
thingthatyou care so much aboutthatyou want to make itthe greatestit
can possiblybe, notbecauseofwhat you will get, but just becauseit can
be done.
When you do this, you will startto grow, inevitably,towardbecominga
Level 5 leader. Early in the book, we wondered about how to become210 Jim Collins
Level 5,and we suggestedthatyou startbypracticingthe rest ofthe find
ings. Butunderwhat conditionswill you have the drive and disciplineto
fully practice the other findings? Perhaps it is when you care deeply
enoughaboutthe work in whichyou are engaged,andwhen your respon
sibilitiesline upwith your own personalthree circles.
When all these pieces come together,not only does your work move
toward greatness,but so does your life. For, in the end, it isimpossibleto
have a great life unless it is a meaningfullife. And it is very difficultto
have a meaningful life without meaningful work. Perhaps, then, you
mightgain thatrare tranquillitythat comesfrom knowingthatyou'vehad
a hand increatingsomethingof intrinsicexcellencethat makes a contri
bution. Indeed, you might even gain that deepest of all satisfactions:
knowingthat your shorttime here on this earth has been well spent,and
that it mattered.EPILOGUE
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: Did you originallyidentify more than eleven good-to-greatpossibilities
and, if so, whatgood-to-greatexamplesdid not make it into the study?
The eleven good-to-greatcompanieswere the only examplesfrom our initial
universeof Fortune 500 companiesthat met all the criteria for entrance into
the study;they do not representasample.(SeeAppendixLAfor the selection
processwe used.)The fact that we studiedthetotalset of companies that met
our criteriashouldincreaseour confidencein thefindings.We do not need to
worry that a second set ofcompaniesin the Fortune 500 went from good to
great—notby our criteria,anyway—byother methods.
Q: Why did only eleven companies make the cut?
There are threeprincipalreasons.First,we used a very toughstandard(three
times the marketover fifteenyears) asour metricofgreat results.Second,the
fifteen-yearsustainabilityrequirement isdifficultto meet. Many companies
showa sharp riseforfive or tenyears witha hit product orcharismaticleader,
but few companiesmanage to achieve fifteen years. Third, we were looking
for a very specific pattern: sustained great results preceded by a sustained
period of average results (or worse). Great companies are easy to find, but
good-to-greatcompaniesare much more rare. When you add all thesefactors
together,it is notsurprisingthat weidentifiedonlyelevenexamples.
I wouldliketo stress,however,that the "onlyeleven"findingshould not be
discouraging.We had to seta cutoffand wechoseavery tough one. Ifwe had
set a slightlylower hurdle—say,2.5 times the marketor ten years of sustain
ability—thenmany more companieswould have qualified.After completing
the research,I am convincedthat manyorganizationscan make the journey
from good to great if theyapply the lessons in this book. The problem is not
the statisticalodds; the problem isthat peopleare squanderingtheir time and
resourceson the wrongthings.
Q: What about statisticalsignificance,given that only eleven companies
made the final cut as good-to-greatexamples and the total study size is
twenty-eight companies (with comparisons)?
We engagedtwoleading professorsto help usresolvethis question, onestatis
ticianand oneappliedmathematician.The statistician,JeffreyT. Luftigat the212 Jim Collins
Universityof Colorado, looked at our dilemma and concluded that we donot
have a statisticsproblem,pointingout that the conceptof "statisticalsignifi
cance"appliesonlywhensamplingofdata isinvolved."Look,youdidn't sam
ple companies,"he said. "You did a very purposefulselectionand found the
elevencompaniesfrom the Fortune500 that metyour criteria.When youput
these eleven against the seventeencomparisoncompanies,the probabilities
that theconceptsin your frameworkappearbyrandomchance areessentially
zero."When we asked Universityof Coloradoappliedmathematicsprofessor
William P. Briggs to examine our researchmethod, he framed the question
thus: What is theprobabilityof findingby chance a group ofeleven compa
nies,all of whose membersdisplaythe primarytraitsyou discoveredwhile the
direct comparisonsdo not possess those traits? He concluded that the proba
bilityis less than 1 in 17 million.There is virtuallyno chance that we simply
found elevenrandomeventsthat justhappenedto show the good-to-greatpat
tern we werelookingfor. We can conclude with confidencethat thetraitswe
found arestronglyassociatedwith transformationsfrom good to great.
Q: Why did you limit your researchto publicly traded corporations?
Publicly traded corporations have two advantages for research: a widely
agreed upondefinitionof results(so we canrigorouslyselecta studyset) and
a plethora of easily accessibledata. Privatelyheld corporationshave limited
informationavailable,whichwouldbe particularlyproblematicwith compar
ison companies. The beauty of publicly traded companies is that we don't
need their cooperation to obtain data. Whether they like it or not, vast
amounts ofinformationabout them are a matterof publicrecord.
Q: Why did you limit your researchto U.S. corporations?
We concluded that rigor in selection outweighed the benefits of an inter
national study set. The absence of apples-to-applesstock return data from
non-U.S. exchanges would undermine the consistency of our selection
process. The comparative research process eliminates contextual "noise"
(similarcompanies,industries,sizes, ages, and so forth) and gives us much
greater confidence in the fundamental nature of our findingsthan having a
geographicallydiversestudyset. Nonetheless,I suspectthat our findingswill
prove usefulacrossgeographies.A number of the companies in our study are
globalenterprisesand the same conceptsapplied whereverthey didbusiness.
Also, I believethat much of what wefound—Level5 leadership and the fly
wheel, forinstance—willbe harder to swallowforAmericansthan for people
from other cultures.Good to Great 213
Q:Why don't any high-technologycompanies appearin the study set?
Most technology companies were eliminated from consideration because
they are not old enough to show the good-to-greatpattern. We required at
leastthirty years of historyto considera companyforthe study(fifteen years of
goodresultsfollowedbyfifteenyearsofgreat results).Of the technologycom
panies that did have more than thirtyyears of history,none showed the spe
cificgood-to-greatpatternwe were lookingfor. Intel, forexample,neverhad a
fifteen-yearperiod of only goodperformance;Intel has always been great. If
this studywere to be repeated in ten ortwentyyears, I would fully expect that
high-technologycompanieswould makethe list.
Q: How does Good to Great apply to companies that are already great?
I suggestthat they use bothGood toGreatand Builtto Last to help them bet
ter understandwhy theyare great,sothat theycan keep doing the rightthings.
As Robert Burgelman, one of my favorite professorsfrom Stanford Business
School, taught meyears ago, "The singlebiggestdanger in businessand life,
other than outright failure, is to be successfulwithout being resolutelyclear
about why you are successfulin the first place."
Q: How do you explain recent difficulties at some of the good-to-great
companies?
Every company—no matter how great—facesdifficult times. There are no
enduring great companies that have aperfect,unblemished record. Theyall
have ups anddowns.The critical factoris not the absence of difficultybut the
abilityto bounce back and emergestronger.
Furthermore, if any companyceases to practice all of the findings, it will
eventually slidebackward.It is not any one variable in isolation that makes a
company great; it is the combination of all of the piecesworkingtogether in
an integrated packageconsistentlyandover time. Two current cases illustrate
this point.
One current caseforconcern isGillette,which produced eighteen years of
exceptional performance—rising to over 9 times the market from 1980 to
1998—but stumbled in 1999. We believe the principal source of this diffi
culty lies in Gillette's need forgreaterdisciplinein stickingto businessesthat
fit squarelyinside the threecirclesof itsHedgehogConcept. Of even greater
concern is the clamoring from industryanalyststhat Gillette needs a charis
matic CEO from outside the company to come in and shake things up. If
Gillette brings in a Level4 leader, then theprobabilitythat Gillette will prove
to be an enduringgreat company will diminishconsiderably.
Another troubling case is Nucor, which hit its peak in 1994 at fourteen
times the market, then fell off considerably as it experienced management
turmoil in the wake of Ken Iverson's retirement. Iverson's chosen successor214 Jim Collins
Will Gillette Go from Good to Great to Built to Last?
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market,
1927-2000
1927 1940 1960 1980 2000
lasted only a shorttime in the job, before beingousted in an ugly executive-
suite battle. One of the architectsof thisboardroomcoup indicated in the
CharlotteNews and Observer(June 11,1999,page Dl) that Iversonhadfallen
from Level 5 leadershipin his old age and hadbegun to display more ego
centricLevel4 traits."In hisheyday,Ken was a giantofa man," he said,"but
he wantedto take thiscompanyto thegrave with him." Iversontells a differ
ent story, arguing that the real problem is current management'sdesire to
diversify Nucor away from its HedgehogConcept. "Iverson just shakes his
head,"wrote the News and Observer,"sayingit was to getaway from diversifi
cationthat Nucorbecamea narrowlyfocused steel productscompanyin the
firstplace."Whateverthe case—lossofLevel 5leadershiporstrayingfrom the
Hedgehog Concept, or both—the future of Nucor as a great company
remains uncertain at the time ofthiswriting.
That being said, it is worth notingthat mostof the good-to-greatcompa
nies are still going strong at the time of this writing. Seven of the eleven
companieshavethus fargenerated over twentyyearsofextraordinaryperfor
mance from their transition dates, with the median of the entire group
being twenty-fouryears ofexceptionalresults—aremarkablerecord by any
measure.Good to Great 215
Q: How do youreconcilePhilipMorrisas a"great"companywith the fact
that it sells tobacco?
Perhapsnocompanyanywheregeneratesas much antipathyas PhilipMorris.
Even if atobacco companycan beconsideredtruly great (and many would
disputethat),there is doubtas towhetherany tobaccocompanycanendure,
given the ever-growingthreat of litigation and social sanction. Ironically,
Philip Morris has the longesttrack record of exceptionalperformancefrom
the date of its transition—thirty-fouryears—and is the only company that
made it into both studies(GoodtoGreatand Builtto Last).This performance
is not justa functionofbeingin anindustrywith high-marginproductssoldto
addicted customers.Philip Morris blew away all the other cigarettecompa
nies, includingits directcomparison,R. J. Reynolds.Butfor PhilipMorristo
have a viablefuture will requireconfrontingsquare-onthe brutalfacts about
society's relationshipto tobacco and the social perceptionof the tobacco
industry.Alarge percentageofthe publicbelievesthatevery memberofthe
industryparticipatedequallyin asystematiceffortto deceive.Fairor not, peo
ple—especiallyin the United States—canforgive a lot ofsins, but will never
forgetor forgivefeelinglied to.
Whateverone'spersonalfeelingsaboutthe tobaccoindustry(andthere was
a wide range offeelingson theresearchteam andsome very heateddebates),
havingPhilipMorrisin both Good to Great and Builtto Last has provedvery
instructive.It has taught me that itis not thecontent of a company'svalues
that correlateswith performance,but thestrengthofconvictionwith which it
holds those values,whatevertheymightbe. This isone ofthose findingsthat
I find difficultto swallow,but that arecompletelysupportedby the data. (For
further discussionof this topic,see chapter 3ofBuilttoLast, pages65-71.)
Q: Can a company have aHedgehogConcept and have a highly diverse
business portfolio?
Our study stronglysuggests that highly diversifiedfirms and conglomerates
will rarely produce sustainedgreat results. One obvious exceptionto this is
GE, but we can explain this case by suggestingthat GE has a very unusual
and subtle HedgehogConcept that unifies its agglomerationof enterprises.
What can GE do better than any company in the world? Develop first-rate
general managers.In our view, that is the essence of GE's HedgehogCon
cept.And whatwould be GE'seconomicdenominator?Profitpertop-quartile
managementtalent.Think aboutit this way: You have two businessopportu
nities, both that might generate $X million in profits. But suppose one of
those businesseswould drain three times the amount of top-quartile manage
ment talent toachievethoseprofitsasthe other business.The one that drains
less managementtalentwould fit with the HedgehogConceptand the other
would not. Finally, what does GE pride itselfon more than anything else?
Having the best set of general managers in the world. This is their true216 Jim Collins
passion—morethan lightbulbs,jetengines,ortelevisionprogramming.GE's
HedgehogConcept,properlyconceived,enablesthe companytooperateina
diversesetofbusinessesyet remainsquarelyfocusedonthe intersectionofthe
three circles.
Q: Whatisthe role ofthe boardofdirectorsin atransformationfrom good
to great?
First, boards play a key role in pickingLevel 5 leaders.The recentspate of
boards enamored with charismaticCEOs, especially"rock star" celebrity
types, is one ofthe most damagingtrendsfor the long-termhealthofcompa
nies. Boards should familiarize themselves with the characteristics of Level 5
leadershipand install such leaders into positionsof responsibility.Second,
boards at corporationsshould distinguishbetween share value and share
price. Boards have no responsibilityto alarge chunk ofthe people who own
companysharesat any given moment,namelythe shaieflippers;they should
refocus their energies on creatinggreat companiesthat build value for the
share/zo/cfers.Managingthe stockfor anythingless than a five-to-ten-yearhori
zon confuses price and value and is irresponsibleto shareholders.For a
superblook atthe board'srole intakinga companyfrom good togreat,I rec
ommend the book Resisting Hostile Takeovers by Rita Ricardo-Campbell
(Praeger Publishers, 1997). Ms. Ricardo-Campbellwas a Gillette board
memberduringthe ColmanMocklerera and providesa detailedaccountof
how a responsibleboard wrestledwith the difficultand complexquestionof
price versus value.
Q: Can hot young technologycompaniesin a go-go world have Level 5
leaders?
My answer is two words: John Morgridge. Mr. Morgridgewas the transition
CEO who turneda small,strugglingcompanyin theBayArea intoone ofthe
great technologycompaniesof the last decade. With the flywheel turning,
this unassumingand relativelyunknown man stepped into the background
and turned the companyover to the next generationofleadership.I doubt
you've ever heard ofJohn Morgridge,but I suspectyou've heard of the com
pany. It goes bythe name Cisco Systems.
Q: How can youpracticethe disciplineof "firstwho" when there is a short
ageof outstanding people?
First,at the toplevels ofyour organization,you absolutelymust have the dis
ciplinenot tohire until you find the right people.The single most harmful
stepyou cantake in ajourneyfrom good togreatis toputthe wrongpeoplein
key positions.Second,widen your definitionof"rightpeople"to focus more
on thecharacterattributesofthe person and less on specializedknowledge.Good to Great 217
People can learn skills and acquire knowledge, but they cannot learn the
essentialcharacter traitsthat make them right for yourorganization.Third—
and this iskey—takeadvantageof difficulteconomic times to hire great peo
ple, even if you don't have aspecific job in mind. A year before I wrote these
words, nearly everyonebemoaned the difficultyof attracting top talentaway
from hottechnologyand Internet companies.Nowthe bubble has burst, and
tens of thousands of talented people have been cast into the streets. Level 5
leaders will view this as the single best opportunity to come along in two
decades—nota market or technologyopportunity,but a people opportunity.
They will take advantageof this moment and hire as many of the very best
people they can afford and then figure out what they are going to do with
them.
Q: How can you practicethe discipline of the "right people on the bus and
the wrong people off the bus" in situations where it is very hard to get the
wrong people off the bus—such as academic institutions and government
agencies?
The same basic idea applies, but it takes more time to accomplish. A
prominent medical school, for example, went through a transformation
from good to great in the 1960sand 1970s.The director of academic med
icine changed the entire faculty,but it took him two decades. He could not
fire tenured professors,but he could hire the right people for every open
ing, gradually creating an environment where the wrong people felt
increasingly uncomfortable and eventually retired or decided to go else
where. Also, you can use the Council mechanism to your advantage. (See
chapter 5.) Fill Council seatsentirelywith the right people, and just ignore
the others. Yes, you might still have to carry the wrong people along, but
you can essentially restrict them to backseatson the bus by not including
them on the Council.
Q: I'm an entrepreneur running a small company, how do these ideas
apply to me?
Directly. See chapter 9, where I discuss the applicationof the good-to-great
ideas in the contextof small andearly-stagecompanies.
Q: I'm not a CEO. What can I do with these findings?
Plenty.The best answerI can give isto rereadthe storyat the end of chapter 9
about the high schoolcross-countrycoach.218 Jim Collins
Q: Where and how should I begin?
First,familiarizeyourselfwith all thefindings.Remember,no singlefinding
by itselfmakes a great organization;you need to have them all working
togetherasan integratedset. Then work sequentiallythroughthe framework,
starting with "first who" and moving through all the major components.
Meanwhile, work continuously on your own development toward Level 5
leadership.I have laid out thisbook in a sequence consistentwith what we
observedin the companies;the very structureof the book is a road map. I
wish youthe bestofluck on your journeyfrom good to great.APPENDIX 1 .A:
SELECTION PROCESS FOR G000-T0-GREATCOMPANIES
Research-team member Peter Van Genderen was instrumental in the cre
ation of the selection criteria and in the "death march of financial analysis"
required to use the criteriato find thegood-to-greatcompanies.
Criteria for Selection as a Good-to-Great
Company
1. The company shows a pattern of "good" performance punctuated by a
transition point, after which it shifts to "great" performance. We define
"great"performanceas a cumulativetotal stock return of at least 3 times
the generalmarketfor the periodfrom the point oftransitionthroughfif
teen years (T + 15). We define "good" performanceas a cumulativetotal
stock return no better than 1.25 times the generalstock marketfor the fif
teen years prior to the point of transition.Additionally,the ratio of the
cumulative stock return for the fifteen years after the point of transition
divided by the ratio of the cumulative stock return for the fifteen years
prior to the point oftransitionmust exceed 3.
2. The good-to-greatperformancepattern must be a company shift, not an
industryevent. In other words,the companymust demonstratethe pattern
not onlyrelativeto the market,but also relativeto itsindustry.
3. Atthe transitionpoint, thecompanymust havebeen an established,ongo
ing company,not a start-up.This was definedas having operationsfor at
least twenty-fiveyears prior to the transitionpoint. Additionally,it had to
havebeen publiclytradedwith stockreturndata availableat leastten years
prior to the transition point.
4. The transition point had to occur before 1985 so that we would have
enough data to assess the sustainabilityof the transition. Good-to-great
transitions that occurred after 1985 might have been good-to-great
shifts; however, by the time we completed our research, we would be
unable to calculate their fifteen-yearratio of cumulative returns to the
general market.
5. Whatever the year of transition, the company still had to be a significant,
ongoing,stand-alonecompanyat the time of selection into the nextstage
of the research study. Tosatisfythis criterion, the company had to appear
in the 1995 Fortune 500rankings,publishedin 1996.220 Appendix LA
6. Finally,atthe time ofselection,thecompanyshouldstillshow an upward
trend.For any companywhereT + 15 falls before 1996,theslopeofcumu
lativestockreturnsrelativetothe marketfrom the initialpointoftransition
to 1996 should equal or exceed the slope of 3/15 requiredto satisfycrite
rion 1 for the T + 15 phase.
Good-to-Great Selection Process
We used a siftingprocesswith increasinglytighterscreensto find ourcompa
nies. The siftingprocesshad four layersofanalysis:
Screening Process for Selecting
Good-to-Great Companies
••-'126 companies.-'.s ^
Setectedlin&M>&®&m&K;: .pattemanalysls / ^
SelectedlBtQInlllt^atiKMs >"
11 companies
Selected ifito, , <
' " ""afset -*
Cut 1: From the Universe of Companies to 1,435
Companies
We electedto beginour searchwith a listofcompaniesthat appearedon the
Fortune rankingsofAmerica'slargestpublic companies,going as far backas
1965, when the list came into existence. Our initial list consisted of all com
paniesthatappearedon the 1965, 1975, 1985, and 1995 listings.There were
1,435 such companies. Most people know these rankings as the "Fortune
500,"althoughthe total numberof companieslistedmay be asmanyas 1,000Appendix LA 221
becauseFortuneoccasionallychangesthe size and formatofits lists.As a base
set tobegin our analysis,the Fortune largest-companiesrankinghas two key
advantages.First, it lists onlycompaniesof substantialsize (companiesearn
their way onto the listby annualrevenues).Therefore,nearlyeverycompany
in the Fortune ranking met our criterion of being an establishedongoing
companyat the timeoftransition.Second,allcompaniesin theFortunerank
ings arepubliclytraded,whichallowedusto use financialstockreturndata as
the basis for more rigorousscreeningand analysis.Privatelyheld companies,
which do not have to meet the same accounting and disclosurestandards,
offer no opportunityfor an apples-to-apples,direct comparisonanalysis of
performance.Restrictingour setto the Fortune rankingshas oneobviousdis
advantage: It limits our analysis to U.S.-based companies. We concluded,
however,that greaterrigor in the selectionprocess—madepossibleby using
only publicly traded U.S. firms that hold to a common reporting standard
(apples-to-applesstock return data)—outweighedthe benefitsof an interna
tional data set.
Cut 2: From 1,435 Companies to 126 Companies
Our next step was to use data from the Universityof Chicago Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP) to make our final selection of good-to-
greatcompanies.We needed,however,a methodto paredownthe number of
companies to a manageable size. We used the published Fortune rates-of-
return data to reduce the candidate list. Fortunecalculates the ten-year return
to investorsfor each company in therankingsback to 1965. Using this data,
we reduced the number of companiesfrom 1,435 to 126. We screened for
companiesthat showedsubstantiallyabove-averagereturns in the time spans
of 1985-1995, 1975-1995, and 1965-1995. We also looked for companies
that showeda pattern ofabove-averagereturns preceded byaverageor below-
averagereturns. Morespecifically,the 126companiesselected passedanyone
of thefollowingtests:
Test 1: The compound annual total return to investors over the period
1985-1995 exceeded the compound annual average return to investorsfor
the FortuneIndustrialand Servicelistingsoverthe same period by 30 percent
(i.e., total returns exceededaverage returns by 1.3 times), and the company
showed evidence of average or below-averageperformance in the prior two
decades (1965-1985).
Test 2: The compound annual total return to investors over the period
1975-1995 exceeded the compound annual average return to investors for
the FortuneIndustrial and Servicelistingsoverthe same period by 30 percent
(i.e., total returns exceeded average returns by 1.3 times), and the company
showed evidence of average or below-average performance in the prior
decade (1965-1975).222 Appendix LA
Test 3: The compound annual total return to investors over the period
1965-1995exceededthe compoundannual average return to investorsfor
theFortuneIndustrialandServicelistingsoverthesame periodby30 percent
(i.e.,total returnsexceededaveragereturnsby 1.3 times).TheFortunelistings
do notcontainten-yearreturnsbefore 1965,so we decidedto includealltop
performersover the three-decadeperiodin the initialset.
Test4:Companies founded after 1970and whosetotal return toinvestorsover
the period 1985-1995or 1975-1995exceededthe averagereturnto investors
for the FortuneIndustrialand Servicelistingsover the same periodby 30per
cent (i.e.,totalreturnsexceededaveragereturnsby1.3 times)but that did not
meet the above criteria due to a lack of data in the Fortune list in prior
decades.This allowed us tocloselyconsiderany companiesthat performed
well in laterdecadesbutdid notshow upearlieron theFortunelistings.The
1970 cutoffalso allowedus toidentifyand eliminatefrom considerationany
companieswith historiestooshortto be alegitimatetransitioncompany.
Cut 3: From 126 Companies to 19 Companies
Drawingupon the researchdatabaseat the UniversityofChicagoCenter for
Research in Securities Pricing (CRSP), we analyzed the cumulative stock
returnsofeach candidatecompanyrelativeto thegeneralmarket,lookingfor
the good-to-greatstock return pattern.Any companythat met anyone of the
Cut 3eliminationcriteriawas eliminatedat this stage.
CUT 3 EllMIHATICLMJJBilEMA
Any companythat met anyone ofthe followingelimination criteriawas
eliminatedat this stage.
Terminologyused in Cut 3 eliminationcriteria:
T year: Year we identifiedas the pointat which performancebegan an
upward trend—the "transition year," based on when the actual stock
returnsshoweda visibleupwardshift.
X period: Era of observable"good" performance relativeto the market
immediately prior to the Tyear.
Y period: Era of substantiallyabove market performanceimmediately
followingthe T year.
Cut 3 Elimination Criterion #1: The company displays a continual
upward trend relative to the market over the entire time covered by
CRSP data—thereis no Xperiod.
Cut 3 EliminationCriterion#2: The companyshows a flat to gradual
rise relativeto themarket.There isno obviousshiftto breakthroughper
formance.Appendix l.A 223
Cut 3 Elimination Criterion #3: The company demonstrates a transi
tion,but anXperiodofless thanten years. In otherwords,the pretransi-
tion average performancedata was not long enough to demonstratea
fundamental transition. In some cases, the company likely had more
years ofXperiodperformancepriorto the transitionyear, butthe stock
becametradedon the NASDAQ,NYSE, orAMEXduring the Xperiod;
therefore,ourdata didnot go backfar enoughtoverifyan Xperiod.
Cut 3 Elimination Criterion #4: The company demonstrates a transi
tion from terrible performanceto average performancerelative to the
market. In other words, we eliminated classic turnaround situations
wherethe companypulledoutofa downwardtrendand intoa trajectory
parallelwiththe generalmarket.
Cut 3 Elimination Criterion #5: The company demonstrates a transi
tion, but after 1985. Good-to-greattransitionsthat occurredafter 1985
might also have been legitimategood-to-greatcandidates.By the time
we completedourresearch,however,we wouldnotbe able toverifythat
their fifteen-yearratio of cumulativereturnsto the general marketmet
the three-to-one criterion.
Cut 3 Elimination Criterion #6: The company shows a transition to
increased performance,but the rise in performanceis not sustained.
After the initial rise, it goes flat or declinesrelativeto the marketuntil
the time of consideration for selection into the study.
Cut 3 EliminationCriterion#7: The companydemonstratesa volatile
patternofreturns—largeupward and downwardswings—withno clear
X period,Yperiod,or T year.
Cut 3 Elimination Criterion #8: A complete set of CRSP data is not
available before 1975, making it impossibleto identify a verifiableX
period often years.
Cut 3 Elimination Criterion #9: There is a transition pattern, but the
companydemonstrateda periodofsuch spectacularperformanceprior
to the Xperiod that there issubstantialevidencethat the companyis a
greatcompanythathad fallen temporarilyon difficulttimes,ratherthan
a good or mediocrecompanythatbecamegreat.The classicexampleis
Walt Disney.
Cut 3 Elimination Criterion #10: The company is acquired, has
merged,or is otherwiseeliminatedfrom considerationas a stand-alone
companybythe time of the final Cut 3 analysis.
Cut 3 Elimination Criterion#11: The companyshowsa mild transition
but falls short of three times the market.224 Appendix LA
JLILL^^
Companies Admitted in Cut 2
1 AFLAC, Inc.
2 AMP, Inc.
3 Abbott Labs
4 Albertson's, Inc.
5 Alco Standard,Corp.
6 AlleghenyTeledyne,Inc.
7 ALLTELCorp.
8 AmericanExpressCo.
9 American Stores Co.
10 Anheuser-BuschCompanies,Inc.
11 Applied Materials,Inc.
12 Archer Daniels Midland Co.
13 AutomaticDataProcessing
14 BANC ONE Corp.
15 Bank of New York, Inc.
16 Barnett Banks
17 BerkshireHathaway,Inc.
18 BoeingCo.
19 Browning-FerrisIndustries
20 Campbell Soup Co.
21 Cardinal Health
22 Chrysler
23 Circuit City Stores,Inc.
24 Coca-Cola Co.
25 Colgate-PalmoliveCo.
26 Comerica, Inc.
27 Computer Associates
28 Computer SciencesCorp.
29 ConAgra,Inc.
30 Conseco
31 CPC International
(later Bestfoods)
32 CSX
33 Dean Foods Co.
34 Dillard's
35 DoverCorp.
36 DuPont
37 Engelhard Corp.
38 FMC Corp.
39 FederalNationalMortgageAssn.
40 First InterstateBancorp
Outcome in Cut 3
Eliminated, criterion 3
Eliminated, criterion 6
Acceptedinto Cut 4analysis
Eliminated, criterion 1
Eliminated, criterion 3
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criteria 6, 7
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criterion 5
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criterion 1
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criterion 1
Eliminated, criterion 1
Eliminated, criterion 3
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criterion 8
Eliminated, criterion 6
Acceptedinto Cut 4 analysis
Acceptedinto Cut 4analysis
Eliminated, criterion 11
Eliminated, criterion 3
Eliminated, criterion 8
Eliminated, criteria 6, 7
Eliminated, criterion 3
Eliminated, criterion 8
Acceptedinto Cut 4 analysis
Eliminated, criterion 8
Eliminated, criterion 7
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criterion 11
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criterion 7
Acceptedinto Cut 4analysis
Eliminated, criterion 2Companies Admitted in Cut 2
41 First Union Corp.
42 Fleet Financial Group, Inc.
43 Fleetwood Enterprises, Inc.
44 FosterWheeler Corp.
45 GPU, Inc.
46 The Gap, Inc.
47 GEICO
48 General Dynamics Corp.
49 General Electric Co.
50 General Mills, Inc.
51 General Re Corp.
52 Giant Foods, Inc.
53 Gillette Co.
54 Golden West Financial Corp.
55 Hasbro, Inc.
56 Heinz, H. J. Co.
57 Hershey Foods Corp.
58 Hewlett-Packard Co.
59 Humana, Inc.
60 Illinois Tool Works, Inc.
61 Intel Corp.
62 Johnson & Johnson
63 Johnson Controls, Inc.
64 KelloggCo.
65 Kelly Services,Inc.
66 KeyCorp
67 Kimberly-ClarkCorp.
68 Kroger Co.
69 Eli Lillyand Co.
70 Loews Corp.
71 Loral Corp.
72 Lowe's Companies, Inc.
73 MCI Communications Corp.
74 Mapco, Inc.
75 Masco Corp.
76 Mattel
77 McDonald's Corp.
78 Melville
79 Merck & Co., Inc.
80 Mobil Corp.
81 Monsanto Co.
82 Motorola, Inc.
83 Newell Co.
Appendix LA 225
Outcome in Cut 3
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criterion 7
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criterion 8
Eliminated, criterion 10
Eliminated, criterion 7
Eliminated, criteria 5, 11
Acceptedinto Cut 4 analysis
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criterion 6
Accepted into Cut 4 analysis
Eliminated, criterion 3
Eliminated, criterion 6
Accepted intoCut 4 analysis
Accepted into Cut 4 analysis
Eliminated, criterion 7
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criterion 1
Eliminated, criteria 6, 7
Eliminated, criterion 6
Accepted into Cut 4analysis
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criterion 3
Accepted into Cut 4 analysis
Accepted into Cut 4 analysis
Eliminated, criter
Eliminated, criteri
Eliminated, criter]
Eliminated, criter]
Eliminated, criter]
Eliminated, criteri
Eliminated, criter
Eliminated, criter
Eliminated, criteri
Eliminated, criteri
Eliminated, criteri
Eliminated, criter
Eliminated, criteri
Eliminated, criter
Eliminated, criter
on 2
a 3, 6
on 7
on 2
on 7
a 3, 6
a 3, 6
a 3, 6
on 7
on 10
on 1
on 2
a 4, 5
on 1
a 3, 6226 Appendix J.A
Companies Admitted in Cut 2
84 Nike, Inc.
85 NorwestCorp.
86 Nucor Corp.
87 Olsten Corp.
88 Owens-Corning
89 PACCAR, Inc.
90 PacifiCareHealth Systems
91 Pepsico, Inc.
92 Pfizer, Inc.
93 Phelps Dodge Corp.
94 Philip MorrisCompanies,Inc.
95 Pitney Bowes,Inc.
96 Procter & Gamble Co.
97 ProgressiveCorp.
98 Raytheon Co.
99 Reebok
100 Republic New York
101 RockwellInternationalCorp.
102 SCI Systems,Inc.
103 SAFECO Corp.
104 Sara Lee Corp.
105 Schering-PloughCorp.
106 ServiceMaster Co.
107 Shaw Industries, Inc.
108 Sonoco Products Co.
109 Southwest Airlines Co.
110 State StreetBostonCorp.
111 SunTrust Banks
112 SYSCO Corp.
113 Tandy Corp.
114 Tele-Communications, Inc.
115 Turner Broadcasting
116 Tyco International, Ltd.
117 Tyson Foods, Inc.
118 Union Carbide Corp.
119 U.S. Bancorp
120 VFCorp.
121 Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
122 WalgreensCo.
123 Walt Disney
124 Warner-Lambert Co.
125 Wells Fargo & Co.
126 Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc.
Outcome in Cut 3
Eliminated, criteria 1, 7
Eliminated, criterion 5
Acceptedinto Cut 4analysis
Eliminated, criteria 1, 7
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criterion 8
Acceptedinto Cut 4 analysis
Eliminated, criterion 1
Eliminated, criterion 2
Acceptedinto Cut 4 analysis
Acceptedinto Cut 4 analysis
Eliminated, criteria 2, 5
Eliminated, criteria 1, 3
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criterion 8
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criterion 7
Eliminated, criterion 2
Accepted into Cut 4analysis
Eliminated, criterion 7
Eliminated, criterion 7
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criterion 1
Eliminated, criterion 3
Eliminated, criterion 8
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criteria 3, 6
Eliminated, criterion 8
Eliminated, criteria 2, 6
Eliminated, criteria 1, 3
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criterion 2
Eliminated, criterion 6
Eliminated, criterion 1
Acceptedinto Cut 4 analysis
Eliminated, criterion 9
Eliminated, criterion 6, 7
Accepted into Cut 4 analysis
Eliminated, criterion 7Appendix J.A 227
Cut 4: From Nineteen Companies to Eleven Good-
to-Great Companies
We wantedto findcompaniesthat made atransition,not industriesthat made
a transition;merely being in the right industryat the right time would not
qualifya companyfor the study. To separateindustrytransitionsfrom com
pany transitions,we decided to repeat the CRSPanalysisfor the remaining
nineteen companies,onlythis timeagainsta compositeindustryindexrather
than the generalstockmarket.Companiesthat showeda transitionrelativeto
their industry would be selected for the final studyset.
Foreach ofthe remainingnineteen companies,welookedbackin time via
the S&P industrycompositesand createdan industryset ofcompaniesat the
time of transition (within five years). We then acquired CRSP stock return
data on all of the companiesin the industrycomposite.If the companyhad
multiple industry lines of business,we used two separate industry tests. We
then created an industry cumulative returns index against which we plotted
the cumulativereturns forthe transitioncompany.This allowedus toidentify
and eliminate from the studyanycompaniesthat did not show the transition
pattern relativeto their industry.
Through industry analysis, we eliminated eight companies. Sara Lee,
Heinz, Hershey,Kellogg,CPC, and General Millsdemonstrateda dramatic
upward shift relativeto the general stock market in about 1980, but none of
thesecompaniesdemonstrateda shiftrelativeto thefood industry.Coca-Cola
and Pepsico demonstrated a dramatic upward shift relative to the general
stock market in about 1960 and again in 1980, but neither demonstrated a
shift relative to the beverage industry. We therefore ended up with eleven
companiesthat made it through Cuts 1through 4 and into the researchstudy.
(Note: At the time of initial selection into the study, three of the companies
did not yet have a full fifteen years of cumulative stock data—Circuit City,
Fannie Mae, and Wells Fargo. We continued to monitor the data until they
hit T + 15 years, to ensure that they would meet the "three times the market
over fifteen years" standard of performance. All three did, and remained in
the study.)APPENDIX 1 .B
DIRECT COMPARISON SELECTIONS
Direct Comparison Selection Process
The purposeof the directcomparisonanalysisis tocreate as close to a "his
torical controlledexperiment"as possible. The idea is simple: By finding
companiesthat were approximatelythe same ages and hadsimilaropportuni
ties,linesofbusiness,andsuccessprofilesas eachofthe good-to-greatcompa
nies at the time of transition,we were able to conductdirect comparative
analysisin ourresearch,lookingfor the distinguishingvariablesthataccount
for the transitionfrom good togreat.Ourobjectivewas to find companiesthat
could have done what the good-to-greatcompaniesdid, but failed to do so,
and then ask: "What was different?"We performeda systematicand method
ical collectionand scoring of all obvious comparisoncandidatesfor each
good-to-greatcompany,usingthe followingsix criteria.
BusinessFit: At the time oftransition,the comparisoncandidate had similar
productsand servicesas thegood-to-greatcompany.
Size Fit: At the time of transition,the comparisoncandidate was the same
basic size as the good-to-greatcompany. We applied a consistentscoring
matrixbased upon theratio ofthe comparisoncandidaterevenuesdividedby
the good-to-greatcompanyrevenuesat the time oftransition.
Age Fit: The comparison candidate was founded in the same era as the
good-to-greatcompany.We applieda consistentscoringmatrixbasedupon
a calculated age ratio of the comparisoncandidate to the good-to-great
company.
Stock ChartFit: The cumulativestockreturnsto marketchart ofthe compar
ison candidateroughlytracks the patternof thegood-to-greatcompanyuntil
the point oftransition,at which point the trajectoriesof the two companies
separate,withthe good-to-greatcompanyoutperformingthe comparisoncan
didate from that point on.
ConservativeTest: At the time of transition, the comparison candidate was
more successfulthan the good-to-greatcompany—largerand more profitable,
with a stronger market positionand better reputation. This is a critical test,
stackingthe deckagainstour good-to-greatcompanies.Appendix LB 229
Face Validity:This takes into account two factors: (1) The comparisoncandi
date is in a similarline ofbusinessat the time ofselectioninto the study,and
(2) the comparisoncandidateis less successfulthan the good-to-greatcom
panyat the time of selection into thestudy.
Thus, face validityand conservativetest work together:Conservativetest
ensures that the comparisoncompany was stronger than the good-to-great
companyat the yearofthe good-to-greatcompany'stransition,and weakerthan
the good-to-greatcompanyat the time ofselectioninto thestudy.
We scored each comparison candidate on each of the above sixcriteria on
a scale of 1 to 4:
4 = The comparison candidate fits the criteria extremelywell—there
are no issuesor qualifiers.
3 = The comparisoncandidatefits the criteria reasonablywell—there
are minorissuesor qualifiersthat keep itfrom gettinga 4.
2 = The comparisoncandidatefits the criteriapoorly—thereare major
issues and concerns.
1 = The comparison candidate fails the criteria.
The following table shows the comparisoncandidatesfor each good-to-
greatcompanywiththeir averagescoreacrossthe six criteria.The comparison
candidateselectedas the directcomparisonappearsat the top of eachlist.
Abbott
Upjohn 4.00
Richardson-Merrill 3.25
G. D. Searle & Co 3.00
SterlingDrugs 2.83
Schering-Plough 2.70
Bristol-Meyers 2.67
Norwich 2.67
Parke-Davis 2.40
SmithKline Beecham 2.33
Pfizer 2.33
Warner-Lambert 2.17230 Appendix LB
Circuit City
Silo 3.40
Tandy 3.25
Best Buy 1.83
Fannie Mae
Great Western Financial Corp. 2.83
Sallie Mae 2.67
Freddie Mac 2.50
H. F. Ahmanson & Co. 2.33
Household International 2.33
Continental Bancorp 2.20
First Charter 1.60
Gillette
Warner-Lambert 2.67
Avon 2.50
Procter & Gamble 2.33
Unilever 2.33
International Flavors& Fragrances 2.33
Revlon 2.33
The Clorox Company 2.33
Colgate-Palmolive 2.25
Cheeseborough-Ponds 2.00
Bic 1.50
Alberto-Culver 1.50
American SafetyRazor 1.50
Purex Corporation 1.00
Faberge' 1.00Appendix J.B 231
limbeiltCiark
Scott Paper Company* 3.50
The Mead Corporation 3.50
Crown Zellerbach 3.25
St. RegisPaper Company 3.13
International Paper 2.92
Union Camp Corporation 2.67
Georgia-Pacific 2.50
The WestvacoCorporation 2.50
*ScottPaperwas selecteddue tobeinga moredirectcompetitorasthe transition
unfolded.
JjJLJBL
A&P 3.17
Safeway 2.58
Winn-Dixie 2.50
American Stores 2.42
Giant Foods, Inc. 2.33
Jewel 2.25
Albertson's 2.08
Food Fair 1.50
Grand Union 1.00232 Appendix LB
Nucor
Bethlehem Steel Corporation 3.00
Inland Steel Industries, Inc.* 3.00
USX 2.92
National Steel Corporation 2.60
Florida Steel 2.50
Northwestern Steel and Wire Co. 2.40
The Interlake Corporation 2.00
AlleghenyTeledyne 1.83
Republic Steel Corporation 1.75
Lykes Corporation 1.60
Wheeling 1.50
*Inlandscoreshigher onlyin thecategoryofage
conservativefit and face validity;therefore,we
breaker.
fit. Bethlehem score,
selected Bethlehem
> higher in
in the tie-
Philip Morris
R. J.ReynoldsTobacco 3.50
American Tobacco 3.40
LiggettGroup, Inc. 3.25
Lorillard Industries 3.20
Pitney Bowes
Addressograph-Multigraph 3.42
Burroughs(now Unisys) 2.83
Smith-Corona 2.58
Xerox 2.33
NCR 2.25
IBM 2.00
Control Data 1.33Appendix LB 233
Walgreens
Eckerd 3.42
Revco D.S., Inc. 2.67
Rite Aid Corporation 2.17
Wells Fargo
Bank of America 3.33
First Chicago 3.17
NationsBank 3.17
Mellon 3.00
Continental Illinois 3.00
Bank of Boston 2.83
First Interstate 2.25
Norwest 2.17
First Pennsylvania 2.00
Interfirst 1.75APPENDIX 1 . C
UNSUSTAINED COMPARISONS
Number of
Unsustained Years
Comparison of Rise*
Burroughs 10.08
Chrysler 5.67
Harris 6.42
Hasbro 6.33
Rubbermaid 10.83
Teledyne 9.42 -
Median 7.92
Unsustained 8.125
Average
Good-to-Great
Averageover
the analogous
period
Ratio of
Cumulative Stock
Returns to
Market (luring the
Years of Rise
13.76
10.54
6.63
35.00
6.97
17.95
12.15
15.14
4.91$
Ratio of
Cumulative Stock
Returns to
Market during the
Next Ten Years1
0.21
0.69
0.16
0.63
0.31*
0.22
0.26
0.37
2.02H
* This is the number ofyearsfromthe moment of upwardtransitionto the peak
ofthe rise, when theunsustainedcomparisonbeginsto decline againrelativeto
the market.
t Whenever the ratio of returns to the market is less than 1.0, this indicates a
declinein valuerelativeto the market. Forexample,if the ratio is 0.20, then for
every dollar you invest in the company, you fall 80 percent below what you
wouldhaveearned had you investedthat same dollarin the general marketover
the same time period.
t The data for Rubbermaid goes 7.17years after the peak, at which point the
company is acquired.
J Calculated as: For eachgood-to-greatcompany, calculate the ratio of cumu
lative returns to the market from its moment of upward transition to 8.125
years (8.125 is the average rise cycle of the unsustained companies), and then
calculate the average acrossthe eleven good-to-greatcompanies at T + 8.125.Appendix 1. C 235
(Place$1in marketand incompanyon transitiondateand take out on T +8.125.)
|| Foreach good-to-greatcompany,calculatethe ratio of cumulativereturnsto
the marketfrom T + 8.125 to T + 18.125,and averageacross the elevengood-
to-greatcompaniesat T + 18.125.(Place $1 in marketand in companyon T +
8.125,and take it out on T +18.125.)Ifa companydata ends beforeT + 18.125,
use the lastavailabledata cell in the average. ForWells Fargo, we use the last
cell prior to theNorwestmergerin 1998 (10/30/88).
The followingchartshowsa classicunsustainedcomparisonpattern:
Harris Corporation, a Classic Unsustained Comparison
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market,
T-15toT+15
Good-to-Great
Companies
T-15 T+15APPENDIX 1.D
OVERVIEW OF RESEARCH STEPS
Once the twenty-eightcompanieshad been selected (eleven good-to-great,
eleven direct comparison, six unsustained comparison), the following steps
and analyseswere taken by the researchteam.
COMPANY CODING DOCUMENTS
For eachcompany,a memberof the teamwould identifyand collectarticles
and published materialson the company,including:
1. All major articlespublished on the companyover its entirehistory,from
broad sources such as Forbes,Fortune,BusinessWeek, the Wall StreetJour
nal,Nation'sBusiness,the New York Times, U.S. News, the NewRepublic,
Harvard Business Review, and the Economist and from selected articles
from industry-or topic-specificsources.
2. Materialsobtained directlyfrom the companies,especiallybooks,articles,
speechesby executives,internallyproduced publications,annual reports,
and other company documents.
3. Books written about the industry, the company, and/or its leaders pub
lished either bythe companyor byoutsideobservers.
4. Businessschoolcase studiesand industryanalyses.
5. Businessand industryreferencematerials,such asthe BiographicalDictio
nary ofAmericanBusinessLeaders,the InternationalDirectoryofCompany
Histories, Hoover's Handbook of Companies, Developmentof American
Industries,and similar sources.
6. Annual reports,proxy statements,analystreports,and any othermaterials
availableon the company,especiallyduring the transition era.
Then for each company, the researcherwould systematicallycode all of
the information into a "coding document," organized according to the fol
lowingcategories,proceedingchronologicallyfrom the foundingof the com
pany to the presentday:Appendix J.D 237
Coding Category1—OrganizingArrangements:"Hard" items such as organi
zation structure, policies and procedures,systems, rewards and incentives,
ownershipstructure.
Coding Category2—SocialFactors: "Soft" items such as the company'scul
tural practices,people policiesand practices,norms, rituals, mythologyand
stories,group dynamics,managementstyle,and relateditems.
CodingCategory3—BusinessStrategy,StrategicProcess: Primaryelementsof
thecompany'sstrategy.Processofsettingstrategy.Includessignificantmerg
ers andacquisitions.
Coding Category 4—Markets, Competitors, and Environment: Significant
aspects of the company's competitiveand external environment—primary
competitors,significant competitor activities,major market shifts, dramatic
nationalor internationalevents, governmentregulations,industrystructural
issues, dramatictechnologychanges,and related items. Includesdata about
the company'srelationshipto Wall Street.
Coding Category 5—Leadership: Leadership of the firm—key executives,
CEOs,presidents,board members.Interestingdata onleadershipsuccession,
leadership style,and so on.
Coding Category6—Productsand Services: Significantproductsand services
in the company'shistory.
CodingCategory7—PhysicalSettingand Location:Significantaspectsofthe
way thecompanyhandledphysicalspace—plantandofficelayout,new facil
ities,etc. Includesany significantdecisionsregardingthegeographiclocation
ofkey parts ofthe company.
Coding Category8—Use ofTechnology:How the companyused technology:
informationtechnology,state-of-the-artprocessesand equipment,advanced
jobconfigurations,and relateditems.
CodingCategory9—Vision:CoreValues,Purpose,andBHAGs:Were thesevari
ables present?Ifyes, how did they come into being?Did the organizationhave
them atcertainpointsinits historyand not others?Whatrole did theyplay? Ifit
had strongvaluesandpurpose,did theyremainintactorbecomediluted?
Coding Category 10A (for Direct Comparisons Only)—Change/Transition
Activitiesduring Transition Era of CorrespondingGood-to-GreatCompany:
Major attemptstochangethe company,to stimulatea transition,duringthe
ten years prior and ten years after the transitiondate in the corresponding
good-to-greatcompany.238 Appendix l.D
CodingCategory10B (for UnsustainedComparisonsOnly)—AttemptedTran
sition Era: For the ten years leading up to and then during the "attempted
transition era," major change/transitioninitiativesand supporting activities
undertaken by the company.
Coding Category 11 (for Unsustained Comparisons Only)—Posttransition
Decline:Forthe tenyearsfollowingthe attemptedtransitionera,major factors
that seem to have contributed to the company not sustaining its transition.
FINANCIAL SPREADSHEET ANALYSIS
We conducted extensivefinancialanalysisfor each company,examiningall
financial variablesfor 980 combined years of data (35 years on average per
companyfor 28 companies).This comprisedgatheringraw incomeand bal
ance sheet data and examiningthe followingvariablesin both the pre- and
posttransitiondecades:
Total sales in nominal and real (inflation-adjusted)dollars
Salesgrowth
Profitgrowth
Profitmargin
Return on sales
Sales per employeein nominaland real dollars
Profitper employeein nominaland real dollars
PP&E (property,plant,and equipment)
Dividend payout ratio
Selling,general,andadministrativeexpensesasa percentofsales
Researchand developmentasa percentof sales
Collection period in days
Inventory turnover ratio
Return on equity
Ratio of debt to equity
Ratio oflong-termdebt to equity
Interestexpenseas a percent ofsales
High stockpriceto earningspershare
Low stockpriceto earningspershare
Averagestockpriceto earningspershareAppendix LD 239
EXECUTIVE INTERVIEWS
We conductedinterviewsofseniormanagementand membersof theboard,
focusing on people who were in office during the transitionera. We tran
scribedall interviewsand synthesizedthe data into contentanalysisfindings.
UJUIJULJJUL^
Abbott
Circuit City
Fannie Mae 10
Gillette 6
Kimberly-Clark 7
Kroger 6
Nucor 7
Philip Morris 6
Pitney Bowes 9
Walgreens 8
Wells Fargo 9
Total 84
Interview Questions
Couldyou brieflygive an overviewofyour relationshipto the company—years
involvedand primaryresponsibilitiesheld?
Whatdo you see as the top five factorsthatcontributedto or causedthe upward
shift in performanceduring the years [ten years before transition]to [ten years
aftertransition]?
Now let's return to each ofthose five factors, and Yd like you to allocatea total
of100 points to those factors, accordingto theiroverallimportanceto the tran
sition (totalacrossallfive factorsequals 100 points).
Couldyou pleaseelaborateon the [top two or three] factors?Can you give me
specificexamplesthatillustratethe factor?240 Appendix I.D
Did the companymake a consciousdecisionto initiatea majorchangeortran
sitionduring this time frame?
[Ifa consciousdecision:]To the bestofyourrecollection,when didthe company
begin to make the key decisionsthat led to the transition(what year, approxi
mately)?
[Ifa consciousdecision:]Whatsparkedthe decisiontoundertakea majortran
sition?
Whatwas the processby which the companymade key decisionsand developed
key strategiesduringthe transitionera—notwhatdecisionsthe companymade,
buthow did itgo aboutmakingthem?
Whatwas the role, ifany, ofoutsideconsultantsand advisorsinmakingthe key
decisions?
On ascaleofltol 0, whatconfidencedid you have in the decisionsat the time
they were made, beforeyou knew theiroutcome?(Ten meansyou hadgreatcon
fidencethat they were very good decisionswith high probabilityofsuccess.One
means you had little confidencein the decisions;they seemed risky—a roll of
the dice.)
[Ifhad confidenceof6 or greater:]What gave you such confidencein the deci
sions?
How did the companygetcommitmentand alignmentwith its decisions?
Can you cite a specificexampleofhow this took place?
What did you try during the transitionthat didn'twork?
How did the company manage the short-term pressures of Wall Street while
making long-termchangesand investmentsfor the future?
Many companiesundertakechangeprogramsand initiatives,yet theireffortsdo
not produce lasting results. One of the remarkable aspects of [good-to-great
company's] transition is that it has endured—it was not just a short-term
upswing.We find this extraordinary.What makes [good-to-greatcompany]dif
ferent? What were the primary factors in the enduranceof the transitionfar
beyondthe firstfew years?
We willbe comparing[good-to-greatcompany]to [comparisoncompany],which
was in your industryat the time ofyour transitionbut—unlike[good-to-great
company]—didnot show a significantand lastingshift in performance.WhatAppendix l.D 241
was differentabout[good-to-greatcompany]thatenabledit tomake this transi
tion? Othercompaniescould have done whatyou did, but didn't;what did you
have thatthey didn't?
Can you think ofone particularlypowerfulexampleor vignettefrom your expe
rienceor observationthat, to you, exemplifiesthe essenceofthe shiftfrom good
togreatat [good-to-greatcompany]?
Who else wouldyou stronglyrecommendthat we interview?
• Insidemanagementduringandafter the transition.
• Externalboardmembersorotherkey outsidepeople.
Are there anyquestionswe didn'task, butshouldhave?
SPECIAL ANALYSIS UNITS
We undertooka seriesofspecialanalysisunits. These units were designedto
shed light on the question of good to great by systematiccomparisonand
(where possible) quantificationof key variables between the good-to-great
companiesand the comparisoncompanies.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
This analysis unit sought to understandthe role of acquisitionsand divest
ments in the transitionfrom good to great.
Objectives:
1. Whatis the quantitativedifferencein acquisitionsand divestments,ifany,
between the pretransitionand posttransitioneras for the good-to-great
companies?
2. How do thegood-to-greatcompaniesdifferin acquisitionsand divestments
from the direct comparisons?
3. How do thegood-to-greatcompaniesdifferin acquisitionsand divestments
from the unsustainedcomparisons?
To dothis analysis,we createda databasefor eachcompany,year byyear:
1. Listof acquisitionsmade duringthe year and theirfinancialattributes.
2. Total numberof acquisitionsmade duringthe year.242 Appendix J.D
3. Total combined size of allacquisitionsmade during theyear.
4. List ofdivestmentsmadeduringthe year and theirfinancialattributes.
5. Total number of divestmentsmade during the year.
6. Total combined size of alldivestmentsmade during the year.
Usingthisdata, we did eightmajoranalyses:
1. Good-to-greatcompanies:pre-and posttransition.
2. Good-to-greatcompaniesversuscomparisoncompanies:pre-and posttran
sition.
3. Unsustainedtransitioncompanies:pre-and posttransitiondecades.
4. Summary pre- and postdecadeanalysis: good-to-greatcompanies versus
directcomparisonsversusunsustainedcomparisons.
5. Good-to-greatcompanies:transitiondateto present.
6. Good-to-greatcompaniesversuscomparisoncompanies:transitiondate to
1998.
7. Unsustainedcomparisons:transitiondate to 1998. Do thesame analysisas
forthe good-to-greatcompaniesfrom transitiondate to 1998.
8. Summary,transitiondate to 1998: good-to-greatcompaniesversus direct
comparisonsversus unsustainedcomparisons.
In addition, this analysis looked at the qualitativeaspects of acquisitions
and divestitures,examiningquestionssuch as:
1. Overall strategyof acquisitions.
2. Overall strategyof integratingacquisitions.
3. The ultimate successof each major acquisition.
4. Ultimate success of the overallacquisition strategy.
Industry Performance Analysis
In this analysis,we looked at the performanceof the companiesversus the
performanceofthe industries.The purposeofthe analysiswas to determine
whetherthe companieswere in highlyattractiveindustriesat the time ofthe
transition.We createdspreadsheetsthat quantifiedeach industryversus the
company,to determinethe relationshipbetweenthe two.
We comparedeach good-to-greatcompany'sindustryrelativeto all other
industriesthat appearedin the Standard&Poor's Analyst'sHandbookfor a
periodfrom thetransitionyear to 1995.We used thefollowingprocedure:Appendix l.D 243
1. For each good-to-greatcompany, determine all industriesthat are listed in
the S&PAnalyst'sHandbookfrom the yearof transition to 1995.
2. Foreach ofthese industries,use the totalreturnsfromthe transitionyearof
the correspondingcompanyto 1995 to determine the percentage change
in total returns for a period from the transitionyear to 1995.
3. Rank the industries according to their percentage returns over this
period.
Executive Churn Analysis
This analysisunit lookedat theextentto which the executiveteams changed
in the companiesduring crucialpointsin theirhistory.
Using Moody's CompanyInformationReports, we calculated churn in the
good-to-greatcompaniesversuscomparisoncompanies:
• Averagepercent ofdeparturesoverpretransitiondecade.
• Averagepercent ofdeparturesoverposttransitiondecade.
• Averagepercent of additionsoverpretransitiondecade.
• Averagepercent of additionsoverposttransitiondecade.
• Averagetotal churn percentageover pretransitiondecade.
• Averagetotal churn percentageoverposttransitiondecade.
• Same analysesrepeated out to 1998.
Objectives:
1. What isthe quantitativedifferencein executivechurn and/orcontinuity,if
any, betweenthe pretransitionand posttransitioneras forthe good-to-great
companies?
2. Howdo the good-to-greatcompaniesdifferin executivechurn and/or con
tinuity from the directcomparisons?
3. Howdo the good-to-greatcompaniesdifferin executivechurn and/or con
tinuityfrom the unsustainedcomparisons?
CEO Analysis:
We examineda totalof fifty-sixCEOs. Foreach set of CEOs duringthe tran
sition era in all threesets ofcompanies(good-to-great,direct comparison,and
unsustained comparison),we did a qualitativeexamination of:244 Appendix l.D
1. Management style.
2. Executive persona.
3. Personal life.
4. What theysawas their top five prioritiesas CEO.
Also, for each good-to-greatcompany,direct comparison, and unsustained
comparison,we examined the CEO backgroundand tenure. Beginning with
CEOs in place ten years prior to the transitionyear through 1997, we deter
mined:
1. Whether the CEO was broughtin from the outsidedirectlyinto the role of
CEO (i.e., hired as CEO).
2. Number of years of employment with the company prior to becoming
CEO.
3. Age at the time of becomingCEO.
4. Start year and end year of tenure in CEO role.
5. Number of years CEO position was held.
6. Responsibilityheld immediatelypriorto becomingCEO.
7. Factorsin selection of that person as CEO(why picked as CEO).
8. Education (especiallystudyareas—e.g.,law,business—anddegreesheld).
9. Work experienceand other experiences(e.g., military)prior to joiningthe
company.
Executive Compensation
This unit examined executive compensation across the companies in our
study. For the twenty-eightcompanies in thestudy,from ten years before the
transition point to 1998, we collected data and performed a wide variety of
analyses.
1. Total of allofficers'and directors'salary+ bonus as a percent of net worth
at transition year.
2. CEO's total cash compensationasa percent ofnet worthat transitionyear.
3. CEO's salary+ bonus as a percent of net worth at transition year.
4. Differencebetween CEO's salary+ bonus andaverageof top four execu
tives' salary + bonus as a percent of net worth at transition year and at
transition year +10 years.Appendix l.D 245
5. Average of all officers'and directors'salary + bonus as a percent of net
worth at transition year.
6. Total of all officers'and directors' salary+ bonus at transition year.
7. Total of all officers'and directors'salary + bonus as a percent of sales at
transition year.
8. Total of all officers'and directors' salary+ bonus as a percent of assets at
transition year.
9. Top four executives'total cash compensation as a percent of net worth at
transition year.
10. Top four executives'salary+ bonus as a percent of net worth at transition
year.
11. Averageof allofficers'and directors'salary+ bonus at transitionyear.
12. CEO's salary+ bonus as a percent of net income.
13. Difference between CEO's and average of top four executives' salary +
bonus.
14. Difference between CEO's and average of top four executives'salary +
bonus as a percent ofsales.
15. Difference between CEO's and average of top four executives'salary +
bonus as a percent of net income.
16. Averageof allofficers'and directors'salary+ bonus as a percent of salesat
transition year.
17. Average of all officers' and directors' salary + bonus as a percent of net
income at transition year.
18. Total of all officers' and directors' salary + bonus as a percent of net
income at transition year.
19. CEO's total cash compensation as a percent of net income at transition
year.
20. Valueof stocksgranted per yearto CEO as a percent of net worth at tran
sition year.
21. Valueof stocksgrantedper yearto topfour executivesas a percent ofsales
at transition year.
22. Value of stocks granted per year to top four executivesas a percent of
assets at transition year.
23. Value of stocksgranted per year to top fourexecutivesas a percent of net
worth at transition year.246 Appendix J.D
24. CEO salary+ bonus asa percentofsales at transition+10 years.
25. Topfour executives'salary+ bonus asa percentof sales at transitionyear
+ 10 years.
Objectives:
1. What is the quantitativedifference in executive compensation, if any,
between the pretransitionand posttransitioneras for the good-to-great
companies?
2. How do the good-to-greatcompanies differ in executive compensation
from the directcomparisons?
3. How do the good-to-greatcompanies differ in executive compensation
from theunsustainedcomparisons?
Role of Layoffs
In this unit, we sought to examine the good-to-greatcompanies, the direct
comparisons,and theunsustainedcomparisonsfor evidenceoflayoffsasa sig
nificantconscioustacticin an attemptto improvecompanyperformance.We
examined:
1. Total employmenthead count yearby year, from ten years prior to transi
tion through1998.
2. Evidence of layoffs as a significanttactic in an attempt to improve com
pany performance during the tenyears prior and tenyears after the date of
transition.
3. If layoffs did occur, then calculate the number of people laid off, nomi
nallyand as a percent of the totalworkforce.
Corporate Ownership Analysis
The point ofthis analysiswas to determineifthere wereany significantdiffer
ences in the corporateownershipofthe good-to-greatand direct comparisons.
We looked at:
1. The presenceof large-blockshareholdersand groups.
2. The extent of board ownership.
3. The extent of executiveownership.Appendix l.D 247
Media Hype Analysis
This unitlookedat thedegreeof"mediahype" surroundingthe good-to-great
companies,directcomparisons,andunsustainedcomparisons.For the period
ten years before to ten years after the transitiondate for each of thecompa
nies, we looked at:
1. Total number ofarticlesin thepre- and posttransitiondecadesand for the
two decades combined.
2. Total number of "feature"articleson the company in the pre- and post-
transition decades and for the two decades combined.
3. Total number of the above articlesthat explicitlytalk about a "transition,"
"rebound," "turnaround," "transformation,"under wayat the company in
the pre- and posttransitiondecadesandfor the two decadescombined.
4. Total number of"highlypositive"articles,total number of"neutral"arti
cles (from slightly negative to slightly positive), and total number of
"highlynegative"articlesin thepre-andposttransitiondecadesandfor the
two decades combined.
Technology Analysis
This unit examined the role of technology,drawing largely upon executive
interviews and written source materials:
1. Pioneering applicationsoftechnology.
2. Timing of technology.
3. Criteria for selection and use ofspecifictechnologies.
4. Role of technologyin decline ofcomparisoncompanies.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSES FRAMEWORKS
Finally, in addition to the above, we performed a number of comparative
analyses frameworks as we moved through the project. These were less
detailed analysesthan those above, although they all didderive directlyfrom
the research evidence. They included:
The use of bold corporate moves
Evolutionaryversusrevolutionarycorporate process
Executiveclass versusegalitarianism
Causes of decline in once-great comparison companies
Three-circle analysisand fit with corevaluesand purpose248 Appendix l.D
Lengthofbuildupperiodbeforebreakthrough
Timingof HedgehogConceptwith breakthroughdate
Core businessversus HedgehogConceptanalysis
Successionanalysisand successratesof successors
Role ofleadershipin the declineofonce-greatcomparisoncompaniesAPPENDIX 2 . A
INSIDE VERSUS OUTSIDE GEO ANALYSIS
The followingtables show the total number of inside versus outside CEOs
within each company.Foreach good-to-greatcompany,we examinedall the
CEOs from ten years prior to the transition date to 1998. For the direct
comparison company, we did the same analysis, using the corresponding
good-to-greatcompany's transitiondate. For each unsustainedcomparison
company,weexaminedthe periodfrom ten years priorto itsattemptedtransi
tiondate to 1998.Wecountedany CEO who hadbeen with the companyfor
one year or less as an outsider.
Good-to-Great Number of Number of Percent of
Companies CEOs Outsiders Outsiders
Abbott 6 0 0%
Circuit City 3 0 0%
Fannie Mae 4 2 50%
Gillette 3 0 0%
Kimberly-Clark 4 0 0%
Kroger 4 0 0%
Nucor 2 0 0%
Philip Morris 6 0 0%
Pitney Bowes 4 0 0%
Walgreens 3 0 0%
Wells Fargo 3 0 0%
Total 42 2 4.76%250 Appendix 2.A
Direct Comparison
Companies
Number of
CEOs
Number of
Outsiders
Percent of
Outsiders
Upjohn 6 2 33%
Silo 6 4 67%
Great Western 3 0 0%
Warner-Lambert 5 1 20%
Scott Paper 5 1 20%
A&P 7 2 29%
Bethlehem Steel 6 0 0%
R. J.Reynolds 9 3 33%
Addressograph 10 7 70%
Eckerd 3 0 0%
Bank of America 5 0 0%
Total 65 20 30.77%
Onsustained
Comparison
Companies
Number of
CEOs
Number of
Outsiders
Percent of
Outsiders
Burroughs 6 2 33%
Chrysler 4 3 75%
Harris 5 0 0%
Hasbro 3 0 0%
Rubbermaid 4 1 25%
Teledyne 3 0 0%
Total 25 6 24%
Total ComparisonSet 90 26 28.89%Appendix 2.A 251
SUMMARY ANALYS IS
Total Number
of CEOs
Total Number
of Outsiders
Percent of
Outsiders
Ratio of
Comparisonto
Good-to-Great
Good-to-Great
Companies
42 2 4.76%
Direct
Comparison
Companies
65 20 30.77% 6.46
Unsustained
Comparison
Companies
25 6 24.00% 5.04
Total
Comparison
Set
90 26 28.89% 6.07
Number of
Companies
Number of
Companies
That Hired an
Outside CEO
Percent of
Companies
That Hired
Outside CEO
Ratio of
Comparison to
Good-to-Great
Good-to-Great
Companies
11 1 9.09%
Direct
Comparison
Companies
11 7 63.64% 7.00
Unsustained
Comparison
Companies
6 3 50.00% 5.50
Total
Comparison
Set
17 10 58.82% 6.47APPENDIX S.A:
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS RANKINGS
We compared each good-to-greatcompany's industry relative to all other
industries that appeared in the Standard& Poor's Analyst'sHandbookfor a
period from thetransitionyearto 1995.We usedthe followingprocedure:
1. For each good-to-greatcompany,determine allindustriesthat are listed in
the S&PAnalyst'sHandbookfrom the year of transition to 1995.
2. For each ofthese industries,use the total returns from the transition year of
the correspondingcompanyto 1995, to determine the percentage change
in total returns for a period from the transitionyear to1995.
3. Rankthe industriesaccordingto theirpercentagereturns overthis period.
The followingtable shows that a companydoes not need to be in a great-
performingindustryto produce atransitionto greatresults.
INDUSTRY PERFORMANCE FROM TRANSITION YEAR TO 1995,
KJUULEULOJUL^^
Number of
Years of industries
Company Calculation Hanked
Abbott 1974-1995 70
Circuit City 1982-1995 80
Fannie Mae 1984-1995 90
Gillette 1980-1995 76
Kimberly-Clark 1972-1995 64
Kroger 1973-1995 66
Nucor 1975-1995 71
Industry That Hank
Best Reflects of That Percentile
Company Industry of Industry
Medical 28 40%
products
Retail 17 21%
specialty
S&L* 69 77%
Cosmetics 19 25%
Household 18 28%
products
Retail 12 19%
food chain
Steel 70 99%Appendix 5.A 253
Industries Best Reflects of That Percentile
Number of
Years of Industries
Company Calculation Ranked
Philip Morris 1972-1995' 57
Pitney Bowes 1974-1995 70
Walgreens 1975-1995 71
WellsFargo 1983-1995 84
Company Industry of industry
Tobacco 2 4%
Computer
systems
68 97%
Retail
drugstore
13 18%
Major
regional
banks
64 76%
*The savingsand loan industrywas deemed the bestproxyfor Fannie Mae.
+PhilipMorrisdates from 1972 becauseS&Pdataisnot availablebeforethat date.APPENDIX 8,A:
DOOM LOOP BEHAVIOR IN THE COMPARISON GOMPANIES
DIRECT COMPARISONS
A&P
A&P vacillated,shiftingfrom one strategyto another,alwayslookingfora sin
gle stroketo quicklysolve itsproblems.Held peprallies,launched programs,
grabbed fads, fired CEOs, hired CEOs, and fired them yet again. Article
headlinesforA&P during theyears of decline read,"Heraldingthe Trumpet
of Change,""Awakeningthe Giant,""RenewingA&P," and "Great Expecta
tions."The expectationswere neverrealized.1
Addressograph
Went into a Chicken Little"TheSky IsFalling"panic about the decline of its
core business.Tried a quixotic"totalcorporaterejuvenation,"throwing itself
into the office automation field againstIBM, Xerox, and Kodak. When this
failed, the next CEO engineered a "strategic flip-flop" away from office
automation. Then, "like a brainsurgeonvanishingfrom the operating room
in the middle of anoperation,"that CEO resignedafterless than a year. The
next CEO does another"180-degreeturn" and buys his way into offsetprint
ing. Itfails; the companytakes a write-off.FourCEOs in six years,leadingup
to 1984. Later,not one, buttwo bankruptcies.2
Bank of America
Went into a reactionaryrevolutionmode in response to deregulation. Fell
behind in ATMs and technology,then threw itselfinto an expensivecatch-
wup program. Fell behind in California,then launched a crash program to
catch-up.Tried to "pull offits ownversionof Mao's CulturalRevolution"by
hiring corporate change consultants who led "corporate encounter groups"
and tried to institute a "rah-rah approach to management." Lurched after
Charles Schwab;culture clash erupted, and later sold it back. Lurched after
SecurityPacific,tryingto emulateWells Fargo'sCrocker merger;acquisition
failed,creatinga multibillion-dollarwrite-off.3Appendix 8.A 255
Bethlehem Steel
Vacillated back and forth: diversification, then focus on steel, then back to
diversification,then back to steel. Fell behind in technologyand moderniza
tion, then launched a crashprogramto catch up. Managementreactedto the
unions, then unions reacted to management, then management reacted to
unions, then unions reactedto management,and so on.Meanwhile,foreign
competitorsand Nucorsnuck in from belowtodevourmarketshare.4
Eckerd
Fell into doom loop bymaking unrelatedacquisitions,in search of growth,
but without any guiding Hedgehog Concept. Bought a candy company, a
chain of department stores,a securityservice,and a food-servicesupplier. In
the biggestdisaster,it boughtAmericanHome Video; lost $31 million, then
soldit offto Tandyat $72million belowbookvalue.Eckerdnever fully recov
ered, gotboughtin aleveragedbuyout,andlatersold outto J. C. Penney.5
Great Western Financial
Inconsistency of program. Would zig one way (trying to look more like a
bank), then zag anotherway (tryingto become adiversifiedfirm). Into insur
ance, then later out of insurance. Into leasing and manufactured housing,
then back tofocus on finance andbanking."Don't worryabout what you call
us—a bank, an S&L or a Zebra." Held togetherby the personalvision of the
CEO, but when he retired, Great Westernstumbled under its unwieldy, inco
herent model, fell intoreactionaryrestructuring,and sold out toWashington
Mutual.6
R. J. Reynolds
As RJR began to slip and found itselfunder siege from antitobaccoforces, it
reacted bythrowing itselfintoill-consideredacquisitions,such as Sea-Land.It
bought Sea-Landand pouredover $2 billioninto trying to make it work (all
the while, itstobaccofactorieswere fallingapartfrom underinvestment),then
sold it at a loss five years later. With each new CEO, it got a new strategy.
Later, after losingits number one spotto Philip Morris,RJR threw itselfinto a
leveraged buyout, designed primarily to enrich management rather than
build the company.7
Scott Paper
Fell into reactionary diversificationas its core business came under attack
from Procter& Gamble andKimberly-Clark.With each new CEO, Scottgot
a new road, a new direction, a new vision. With fanfare, Scott undertook rad
ical change efforts in the late 1980s, but never answered the question, What256 Appendix 8.A
can we be the best in the world at? Fell into restructuringmode. Hired Al
Dunlap,known asChainsawAl, who cut 41 percentofthe workforcein one
fell swoop and thensold the company.8
Silo
Vacuum left after death of SidneyCooper. Next generationpursuedgrowth
for growth'ssake. WhereasCircuitCity would go into a region, build a dis
tribution center, and fill every surroundingtown with a store, Silo irra
tionallyjumpedfrom city tocity, one store here, anotherstore there,creating
a totallyunsystematichodgepodgeagglomerationofstores, with no regional
economiesof scale. Did not stick with a consistentconcept or layout. Silo
acquiredby Cyclops,then Cyclopsacquiredby Dixons. Managementfired
by newowners.9
Upjohn
Fell into apatternofsellingthe future ("The future never looked brighter")
and hyping the potential of new products. But results failed to match the
hype. Upjohnstock becamevolatileand speculative—upand down, up and
down again—asit sold thesizzle,but neverdeliveredthe steak. Later, like a
gamblerat Las Vegas, it threw its chips on "saviorproducts,"suchas Rogaine
baldnesscure. Persistentproductproblems,with Halcionand others,exacer
batedthe swings. Eventuallysuccumbedto restructuringdiseaseand merged
with Pharmacia.10
Warner-Lambert
Lurched back and forth, from consumer products to pharmaceuticals and
health care, then back again, then both at the same time, then back to one,
then back to the other. Each new CEO had a new vision, and new restructur
ing, stopping the momentum of his predecessorand starting the flywheel
back in another direction.Tried to ignite breakthroughwith bold acquisi
tions, but failed and took hundreds of millions in write-offs.In the end, after
years of inconsistentprograms,it lurched into the arms ofPfizer, ending its
turbulent existenceas an independentcompany.11
UNSUSTAINED COMPARISONS
Burroughs
During its rise, Burroughs' CEO, "a brilliant butabusiveman," led a sweep
ing totalreengineering.Costcuttingled to moraleproblems,which led to los
ing good people.Picked a weak successor.He failed and was replaced by aAppendix 8.A 257
"brilliant, brash, overly aggressive"CEO who set a new direction, blaming
the priorgeneration.Anothermassivereorganization,400executivesleave in
one purge. Posters adorned the walls, touting new programs.The company
restructuredagain. Got yetanother CEO whotried yetanother restructuring,
another new direction. More decline, and then another CEO.12
Chrysler
Fiveyears of stellarperformance,then decline back into crisis."Like so many
patientswith a heart condition,we'dsurvivedemergencysurgeryseveralyears
beforeonly to revertto our old unhealthylifestyle,"wrotean insider. Diverted
attention into Italiansports cars, corporatejet business,and defense. Revived
in secondturnaround in 1990s,but eventuallysold out to Daimler.13
Harris
Rose with a CEO who had a HedgehogConcept in his head, and who pro
duced an initial flywheel effect. But he did not instill this concept into his
executive team. Later, when he retired, executives replaced the Hedgehog
Concept with a growth mantra. Harris lurched off into office automation,
which proved to be a disaster, and then into a series of unrelated acquisi
tions. Fell into the "sell the sizzle,but never deliverthe steak"syndrome. The
flywheelcame to agrindinghalt.14
Hasbro
Hasbro is the one comparison company that nearly got it all right. It built
spectacularresultsbyconsistentlypursuingthe HedgehogConcept ofrevital
izing classictoy brands, like G.I. Joe.Unfortunately,the architect of the ini
tial transformationdied unexpectedlyat a youngage.Hissuccessorappeared
to be more a Level 3 (competent manager) than a Level 5 leader. The fly
wheel slowed. The CEO reacted with restructuringand eventuallyhired an
outsider to rebuild momentum.15
Rubbermaid
If there everwas a company that skippedthe buildup stage, it's Rubbermaid.
ItstransitionCEO launched "a complete restructuringofthe company,a very
dramatic and traumatic undertaking."Growth became the mantra, growth
even at the expenseoflong-termmomentum in the flywheel.When the CEO
retired, it became clear that he was the primary force in the flywheel, not a
strongteam guided bya systematicHedgehogConcept. The flywheelslowed;
the companysuccumbed torestructuringdiseaseand sellingthe future with
out delivering results. Rubbermaid fell from Fortune's number one most
admired to being acquired byNewell,in justfive years.16258 Appendix 8.A
Teledyne
Teledynerose and fell with the geniusofone man, Henry Singleton,known
as the Sphinx. The company'sHedgehogConcept was, in essence: Follow
Henry's brain. Singleton engineered over a hundred acquisitions,in fields
from electronicsto exotic metals. The problems arose when Henry retired
and took hisbrain with him.Teledynefell intoa downwardspiral,eventually
mergingwithAllegheny.17APPENDiX 8,
SUMMARY OF ACQUISITION ANALYSIS
ILIUlJIrllUAaEAIJULIIJEitLUViftSJLSCOMEAJLlSQMJLiLMPANiES^
Company
Total Number
of Acquisitions
(luring Era
Studied
Total Number
of Divestitures
during Era
Studied
Overall
Success
Rate of
Acquisitions
Strategy
Abbott 21 5 +2
Upjohn 25 7 NA
Circuit City 1 0 +3
Silo 4 0 -1
Fannie Mae 0 0 +3
Great Western 21 3 -1
Gillette 39 20 +3
Warner-Lambert 32 14 -1
Kimberly-Clark 22 18 +2
Scott Paper 18 24 -2
Kroger 11 9 +2
A&P 14 4 -3
Nucor 2 3 +3
Bethlehem Steel 10 23 -3
Philip Morris 55 19 +1
R. J. Reynolds 36 29 -3
Pitney Bowes 17 8 +1
Addressograph 19 9 -3
Walgreens 11 8 +3
Eckerd 22 9 -1260 Appendix 8.B
Company
Total Number
of Acquisitions
during Era
Studied
Total Number
of Divestitures
during Era
Studied
Overall
Success
Rate of
Acquisitions
Strategy
Wells Fargo 17 6 +3
Bank of America 22 13 +1
Burroughs 22 7 -2
Chrysler 14 15 -1
Harris 42 7 -1
Hasbro 14 0 +1
Rubbermaid 20 5 +3
Teledyne 85 3 -2
*Toconstructthistable,wedetermined the totalnumber of acquisitionsconducted by
each company from the pretransition decade to 1998.We then assessedeach acquisi
tion on a scaleof-3 to +3, basingourrankingson both financialand qualitativeanaly
sis, and created an average score based on these scores. In the case of Upjohn, we
could not obtain enoughresearchdatato conducta thoroughanalysisand thus did not
assigna score to thecompany.HOTES
CHAPTER 1
1. Beryl Markham, West with the Night (San Francisco:North Point Press,
1983), 25.
2. Stock return calculationsin this book were determined using datafrom
the Universityof ChicagoCenter forResearchin SecurityPrices(CRSP).
Key definitions:
• Monthly Total Return: The total return to shareholdersin a given
month, includingdividendsreinvested,for an individualsecurity.
• CumulativeStock Return: The compounded value of $Yinvestedin an
individualsecuritybetweentimestl and t2,usingthe formula:$Y X(1 +
MonthlyTotal Return @ml) x (1 + MonthlyTotalReturn @m2) x . ..
(1 + Monthly Total Return @t2); where ml = end of the first month fol
lowingtl, m2 = end ofthesecondmonthfollowingtl, and soforth.
• GeneralStock Market (also called the GeneralMarket or just the Mar
ket): NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQvalue-weightedreturn, which consistsof
the combinedmarketvalue ofall companiestradedon these exchanges
(includingdividends reinvested)weighted by the capitalizationof the
companydividedbythe capitalizationofthe market.
• CumulativeReturn Ratio to the Market: At the end of anygiven time,
this ratio is calculated as the cumulative return of $Y invested in the
companydividedbythe cumulativereturnof$Y investedin the general
stockmarket,wherethe $Y isinvestedin boththe companyand the mar
ket on the same date.
• Transition Date (for good-to-greatcompanies):The precise transition
date for a good-to-greatcompanyisthe date when the company'sperfor
mance—in terms of cumulative stock returns relative to the general
stock market—turnsupward after a period of market to below-market
performance,and neveragain falls belowthispoint.
3. Using Universityof Chicago Center forResearchin SecurityPrices data,
cumulative returns were calculated from December 31, 1984, to Decem
ber 31, 1999, for GE and the general market, all dividends reinvested,
adjusted for stocksplits.
4. The charton page 2 was createdusingthefollowingmethodology:262 Notes
1. Foreach good-to-greatcompany,invest$1 at the transitiondate minus
15 years.Also invest$1 in thegeneralmarket.Calculatethe cumulative
stockreturn of$1 investedat thetransitiondate minus 15yearsthrough
the transitiondate plus 15years for the good-to-greatcompany and the
general market. In the case of CRSP data not beingavailable(usually
because the company was not yet publicly traded, merged, or was
acquired),use marketreturnsin lieu ofcompanyreturns.
2. Foreach good-to-greatcompany,calculatethe ratioofcumulativestock
returnsto the generalmarketfrom t-15tot+15to create a "ratio of
cumulative returns" curve.
3. Shift this "ratio of cumulative returns curve" for each good-to-great
companysuch that at the transitiondate, the ratio of cumulativestock
returns to the market equalsprecisely1. This shifts the transition dates
forall the good-to-greatcompaniesto a common referencepoint—time
t. Do this bydividingthe ratioofcumulativestockreturnsto the market
at each month (calculatedin step 2)from t-15tot+15by the ratioof
the cumulative stock return number calculated at preciselythe transi
tion date.
4. Use these shifted returns to calculate the average ratio of cumulative
stockreturns to the market acrossall elevengood-to-greatcompanies at
each month t-15tot+15. In otherwords,calculatethe averageof the
calculation in step 3 at t - 15 across all eleven companies,then t - 15
plus 1 month forallelevencompanies,plus 2months,and soforth, for
all 360 months. This creates the combined, cumulative returns relative
to the marketcurvefor the good-to-greatcompanies.
5. Foreach direct comparisoncompany,repeatsteps 1-3 above, usingthe
same dates for the direct comparison company as for its counterpart
good-to-greatcompany.
6. Forthe direct comparisoncompaniesasa set,repeatstep4 above.
7. This chartshowsthe good-to-greatcompaniesversusthe direct compar
ison companies,cumulativereturnsratioto themarket,t-15tot+15,
with t as a commonreferencepoint wherethe ratioto the marketis set
to 1.0.
The chart on page4 was createdusingthe followingmethodology:
1. For eachgood-to-greatcompany,invest$1 on December31, 1964 (the
date of the firsttransition in our study).
2. For eachgood-to-greatcompany,calculatecumulativestock returnsat
the marketrateofreturn throughthe transition-datemonth,then switch
overto using returns from the good-to-greatcompany. For anymissing
CRSP data(usuallybecausethe companywas not yet publiclytraded,
merged,or was acquired),use the marketrate ofreturn in lieu ofcom
pany returns.Notes 263
3. Foreachmonth from December31,1964,throughDecember31,1999,
addthe cumulativereturnsacrossall elevencompaniesanddivideby11.
This gives the cumulativereturn of $1 investedin the entire set.
4. For the general market, invest $1 on December 31, 1964, and carry
through December 31,1999.
5. For each direct comparison company repeat steps 1-3, holding the
company at the market rate until the date of transition for the corre
spondinggood-to-greatcompany. Notes: RJR held at market ratefrom
May 31, 1989,to December31, 1999,asthe companyemergedfrom its
LBO in differentpieces (RJR and Nabisco).
6. This chartshows the market versus the comparisoncompaniesversus
the good-to-greatcompanies,the value of $1 investedfrom December
31, 1964,to year 2000.
CHAPTER 2
1. David McCullough,Truman (NewYork: Simon & Schuster,1992), 564.
2. Robert Spector, based on research and a manuscriptby William W.
Wicks,SharedValues:AHistoryofKimberly-Clark(Connecticut:Green
wichPublishingGroup, 1997), 101.
3. "Darwin Smith May Have Done Too Good a Job," Business Week,
August 1, 1988, 57; "Rae Takes On the Paper Industry'sTough Lone
Wolf," Globe and Mail, July 20, 1991; "FormerCEO of K-C Dies,"Dal
lasMorningNews, December27, 1995, ID.
4. ResearchInterview#5-E, page 26.
5. ResearchInterview#5-E, page 26.
6. "Darwin Smith May Have Done Too Good a Job," Business Week,
August 1, 1988, 57.
7. "Darwin Smith May Have Done Too Good a Job," Business Week,
August 1, 1988, 57; "Kimberly-ClarkBets, Wins on Innovation," Wall
StreetJournal,November 22,1991,A5; "Darwin E. Smith, 69, Executive
Who Remadea Paper Company,"New York Times, December 28,1995,
B9; RobertSpector,based on researchand a manuscriptbyWilliamW.
Wicks,SharedValues:AHistoryofKimberly-Clark(Connecticut:Green
wich PublishingGroup, 1997), 101.
8. Robert Spector, based on research and a manuscriptby William W.
Wicks,SharedValues:AHistoryofKimberly-Clark(Connecticut:Green
wichPublishingGroup, 1997), 112.
9. InternationalDirectoryofCompanyHistories,vol. 3 (Chicago:St. James
Press, 1991), 40; "Kimberly-Clark—Aimingfor the Consumer,"Finan
cial World, April 1, 1970,15.
10. Robert Spector, based on research and a manuscriptby William W.
Wicks,SharedValues:AHistoryofKimberly-Clark(Connecticut:Green-264 Notes
wich PublishingGroup, 1997), 106, 112; "DarwinE. Smith, 69, Execu
tive Who Remade a Paper Company,"New York Times, December 28,
1995,B9;"FormerCEO of K-C Dies,"DallasMorningNews, December
27, 1995, ID; ResearchInterview#5-E, page 6; "PaperTiger: How Kim
berly-ClarkWraps Its Bottom Line in DisposableHuggies,"Wall Street
Journal,July 23, 1987, 1.
11. "The Battle of the Bottoms," Forbes, March 24, 1997, 98.
12. "The Battle of the Bottoms," Forbes, March 24, 1997, 98.
13. Robert Spector, based on research and a manuscript by William W.
Wicks,SharedValues:A HistoryofKimberly-Clark(Connecticut: Green
wich Publishing Group,1997), 10.
14. ShelbyFoote,The CivilWar: ANarrative:Red RivertoAppomattox(New
York: Random House, 1975), 1040; James M. McPherson, Battle Cry of
Freedom:TheCivil War Era (NewYork: Ballantine Books, 1989), 854.
15. Gordon McKibben,Cutting Edge: Gillette'sJourney to Global Leader
ship (Boston:HarvardBusinessSchoolPress, 1998), 14.
16. Company "Chronology,"Gillette corporate typescript, 1995; Gordon
McKibben, Cutting Edge: Gillette's Journey to Global Leadership
(Boston: Harvard BusinessSchool Press, 1998), 198, 199; Rita Ricardo-
Campbell, ResistingHostile Takeovers:The Case of Gillette (Connecti
cut: PraegerPublishers,1997), 153.
17. Gordon McKibben,Cutting Edge: Gillette'sJourney to Global Leader
ship (Boston:HarvardBusinessSchoolPress, 1998), 159.
18. Rita Ricardo-Campbell,ResistingHostileTakeovers:The Case of Gillette
(Connecticut: PraegerPublishers,1997).
19. Author conversation with Gillette CEO, summer 2000. "We invested
almost $1.5 billion in Sensorand Mach3. We believed that these projects
wouldhave been scrappedhad thetakeoverhappened."
20. Gordon McKibben,Cutting Edge: Gillette'sJourney to Global Leader
ship (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1998), 158. Calculations
run usingCRSP data.
21. Gordon McKibben,Cutting Edge: Gillette'sJourney to Global Leader
ship (Boston:HarvardBusinessSchoolPress, 1998),254.
22. "Maxwell RelinquishesRights to $5.5 Million Final RetirementPay
ment," PR Newswire, January 21, 1992; "$5.5 Million Declined by Ex-
Official,"WashingtonPost, January22, 1992, Fl.
23. "Iacocca's Last Stand,"Fortune,April 20, 1992,63.
24. "Sincere Tyranny,"Forbes,January28, 1985, 54.
25. "Managing: Leaders of Corporate Change," Fortune, December 14,
1992, 104.
26. "Chairman Quits Post," New York Times, November 17, 1992, D5;
"Rubbermaid's Sad Succession Tale," New York Times, July 5, 1987,
CI.
27. "Is Rubbermaid ReactingToo Late?" New York Times, December 22,
1996, Al.Notes 265
28. Research Interview#7-D, page 17.
29. Chris Jones and Duane Duffy, "Media Hype Analysis" (unpublished),
Good to Great research project, summers 1998,1999.
30. "Did CEO Dunlap Save Scott Paper-or Just Pretty It Up? The Shred
der," BusinessWeek, January 15, 1996.
31. "Did CEO Dunlap Save Scott Paper-or Just Pretty It Up? The Shred
der," BusinessWeek, January 15, 1996; "Chain SawAl to the Rescue?"
Forbes, August 26, 1996; "After the Fall," Across the Board, April 1996,
28-33; "Only the Paranoid Survive,"Worth Online,October 1996;Albert
J. Dunlap with BobAndelman,Mean Business:How I Save BadCompa
niesand Make GoodCompaniesGreat (NewYork: Fireside, 1997), 20.
32. Albert J. Dunlap with Bob Andelman, Mean Business:How I Save Bad
Companies and Make Good Companies Great (New York: Fireside,
1997), 132.
33. The caseswherea charismaticCEO eventuallybecame aliabilityfor the
company were Great Western,Warner-Lambert,Scott Paper, Bethlehem
Steel, R. J.Reynolds,Addressograph-Multigraph,Eckerd, BankofAmer
ica, Burroughs,Chrysler, Rubbermaid,and Teledyne.
34. "President Iacocca," Wall Street Journal, July 28, 1982, 1; "Iacocca
Hands Over the Keys to Chrysler,"InvestorsBusinessDaily, January 4,
1993, 1.
35. "Iacocca Hands Over the Keys to Chrysler,"Investors Business Daily,
January 4, 1993, 1.
36. "How ChryslerFilled Detroit'sBiggestShoes,"Wall StreetJournal, Sep
tember 7, 1994, Bl.
37. "Why Certain Stocks," Wall Street Journal, April 13, 1995, Al;
"Chrysler's New Plan: Sell Cars,"Fortune,June 26, 1995, 19.
38. "Will SuccessSpoilChrysler?"Fortune,January10, 1994; "Companyof
the Year: ChryslerHasthe Hot Cars. MoreImportant,It Hasa Smart,Dis
ciplined Management Team," Forbes, January 13, 1997, 82; "Daimler-
Benz Will Acquire Chrysler in $36 Billion Deal That Will Reshape
Industry,"NewYork Times, May7, 1998,A6.
39. ResearchInterview#1-A, page 3; ResearchInterview#1-G, page 35; "A
Drugmaker'sReturn to Health,"BusinessWeek, April 26, 1976, 38; Her
man Kogan,The Long WhiteLine:The StoryofAbbottLaboratories(New
York: Random House, 1963), 249.
40. The Upjohn Company, InternationalDirectory of Company Histories,
707;"The Medicine Men of Kalamazoo,"Fortune,July 1959, 106.
41. Leigh Wilbanks, "CEO Analysis Unit" (unpublished), Good to Great
research project, summer1998.
42. Universityof Chicago Center for Research in Securities Prices data, all
dividendsreinvestedand adjustedforstocksplits.
43. ResearchInterview#10-D,pages 9-10.
44. Herman Kogan and Rick Kogan, Pharmacistto the Nation (Deerfield,
111.: WalgreensCompany,1989),236; ResearchInterview#10-F,page 3.266 Notes
45. ResearchInterview#2-G, page 10.
46. Universityof Chicago Center forResearchin SecuritiesPrices data, all
dividendsreinvestedand adjustedfor stocksplits.
47. ResearchInterview#2-G,page 16.
48. ResearchInterview#7-H, page 12.
49. ResearchInterview#8-A, pages4-5, 9, 10.
50. Joseph F. Cullman 3d, Ym a Lucky Guy (Joseph F. Cullman 3d,
1998), 1.
51. "Searching for Profits at Bethlehem," New York Times, December 25,
1983, CI.
52. "Steel Man KenIverson,"Inc., April 1, 1986,40.
53. Jeffrey L. Rodengen, The Legend of the Nucor Corporation(Fort Lau
derdale,Fla.:Write StuffEnterprises,1997),71.
54. JosephF. Cullman 3d, Ym a Lucky Guy (JosephF. Cullman 3d, 1998).
55. Gordon McKibben, Cutting Edge: Gillette'sJourney to Global Leader
ship (Boston:Harvard BusinessSchool Press, 1998), 78-79.
CHAPTER 3
1. Tom Wolfe, The ElectricKool-AidAcid Test (New York: Bantam, 1999),
83.
2. Warren Buffett,The EssaysofWarrenBuffett:Lessonsfor CorporateAmer
ica, selected, arranged, and introduced by Lawrence A. Cunningham
(Lawrence A. Cunningham, Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law,
YeshivaUniversity,1998),97.
3. ResearchInterview#11-B,page 5.
4. Duane Duffy, "Industry Analysis Unit" (unpublished), Good to Great
research project, summer 1998,CRSP financial dataanalysis.
5. ResearchInterview#11-H,page 5;"ABankerEven Keynes Might Love,"
Forbes,July 2, 1984,40.
6. Research Interview#11-F,pages 1-2, 5.
7. ResearchInterview#11-H,pages 15, 20.
8. Gary Hector, Breaking the Bank: The Decline of BankAmerica (Little,
Brown & Company, 1988), 145.
9. "BigQuarterly Deficit Stuns BankAmerica,"Wall StreetJournal,July 18,
1985, Al.
10. Gary Hector, Breaking the Bank: The Decline of BankAmerica (Little,
Brown & Company, 1988), 73, 143; "BigQuarterly Deficit StunsBank-
America,"WallStreetJournal,July18,1985,Al; "AutocratTom Clausen,"
Wall StreetJournal, October 17, 1986, 1; further confirmed in conversa
tion between Jim Collins and two former Bank of America executives,
July-August 2000.
11. "Combat Banking,"Wall StreetJournal,October 2, 1989,Al.Notes 267
12. Research Interview#3-1, page 7.
13. ResearchInterview#3-1, pages 3-14.
14. Research Interview#3-1, page 7.
15. ResearchInterview#3-1, pages 3, 15.
16. ResearchInterview#3-A, page 13.
17. Research Interview#3-D,page6.
18. "Eckerd Ad Message: Tailored to Fit," ChainstoreAge Executive, May
1988, 242; "Heard on the Street,"Wall StreetJournal, January21, 1964,
B25; "Jack Eckerd Resignsas ChiefExecutive,"Wall StreetJournal,July
24, 1974, 17; "J. C. Penney Gets Eckerd Shares," Wall Street Journal,
December 18, 1996, BIO; "J. C. Penney Has Seen the Future,"
KiplingersPersonalFinanceMagazine,February1, 1997, 28.
19. ResearchInterview#10-E,page 16.
20. "Tuning In," Forbes,April 13, 1981, 96; "VideoFollies,"Forbes, Novem
ber 5,1984,43;ResearchInterview#10-F,page 10.
21. "The Forbes Four Hundred," Forbes, October 17, 1994, 200.
22. InternationalDirectoryofCompanyHistories,vol. 10(Chicago:St.James
Press, 1995), 520.
23. InternationalDirectory of Company Histories, vol. 10 (Chicago: St.
JamesPress, 1995);"MakingBigWaves with Small Fish,"BusinessWeek,
December 30, 1967, 36.
24. "The SphinxSpeaks,"Forbes, February20, 1978, 33.
25. "The SingularHenrySingleton,"Forbes,July 9, 1979,45.
26. Scott Jones, "Executive CompensationAnalysis Unit" (unpublished),
Good toGreat researchproject,summer 1999.
27. Jim Collins,"SummaryChanges in CompensationAnalysis, Summary
Notes#5" (unpublished),Good to Great researchproject,summer 1999.
28. "Nucor Gets Loan," Wall Street Journal, March 3, 1972, 11; "Nucor's
Big-BuckIncentives,"BusinessWeek, September21, 1981,42.
29. "A New Philosophy,"Winston-SalemJournal,March 21, 1993;"Changing
the Rules ofthe Game,"PlanningReview, September/October1993,9.
30. "How Nucor CrawfordsvilleWorks," Iron Age New Steel, December
1995, 36-52.
31. "ANew Philosophy,"Winston-SalemJournal, March 21, 1993.
32. "Nucor Gets Loan," Wall StreetJournal,March 3, 1972, Bl 1.
33. ResearchInterview#9-F, page 29.
34. Joseph F. Cullman 3d, Ym a Lucky Guy (Joseph F. Cullman 3d, 1998),
82.
35. "Bold Banker: Wells Fargo Takeover of Crocker Is Yielding Profit but
SomePain,"Wall StreetJournal,August5, 1986,Al.
36. "Bold Banker: Wells Fargo Takeover of Crocker Is Yielding Profit but
Some Pain,"Wall StreetJournal,August5, 1986,Al.
37. ResearchInterview#11-G, page 10; ResearchInterview#11-A, page 29;
ResearchInterview#11-F, page 11; "Bold Banker:Wells Fargo Takeover268 Notes
of CrockerIsYieldingProfitbut SomePain,"Wall StreetJournal,August
5,1986, Al.
38. "Boot Camp for Bankers,"Forbes,July 23, 1990,273.
39. ResearchInterview#11-H,pages 10-11.
40. Chris Jonesand Duane Duffy,"LayoffsAnalysis"(unpublished), Good to
Greatresearch project, summers1998 and 1999.
41. "Wells Buys Crocker in Biggest U.S. Bank Merger," American Banker,
February10,1986, 39;"WellsFargoTakeoverofCrockerIs YieldingProfit
but Some Pain," Wall Street Journal, August 5, 1986, Al; "A California
BankThat Is Anythingbut LaidBack,"BusinessWeek, April 2, 1990,95.
42. Chris Jones and Duane Duffy,"LayoffsAnalysis"(unpublished), Good to
Great researchproject,summers1998 and 1999.
43. Research Interview#2-A, pages 1,11.
44. "Industry Fragmentation Spells Opportunity for Appliance Retailer,"
InvestmentDealers Digest,October 12,1971, 23.
45. "Circuit City: PayingCloseAttentionto ItsPeople,"ConsumerElectron
ics, June 1988, 36.
46. ResearchInterview#2-D,pages 1-2.
47. "Dixons Makes $384 Million U.S. Bid," FinancialTimes, February 18,
1987, 1; "UK Electronics Chain Maps US Strategy; Dixons Moving to
AcquireSilo,"HFD—theWeeklyHome FurnishingNewspaper,March 2,
1987;"DixonsTightensGrip onSilo,"HFD-the WeeklyHome Furnish
ings Newspaper,February3, 1992, 77.
48. Eric Hagen, "ExecutiveChurn Analysis" (unpublished),Good to Great
research project, summer 1999.
49. "Gillette: The Patient Honing of Gillette," Forbes, February 16, 1981,
83-87.
50. "When MarketingTakesOverat R. J.Reynolds,"BusinessWeek, Novem
ber 13, 1978, 82; "Tar Wars," Forbes, November 10, 1980, 190; Bryan
Burroughand John Helyar, Barbariansat the Gate (NewYork: Harper
Collins, 1991), 51.
51. Research Interview#8-D, page 7.
52. "The GeorgeWeissmanRoad Show,"Forbes, November10, 1980, 179.
53. Joseph F. Cullman 3d, Ym a Lucky Guy (Joseph F. Cullman 3d, 1998),
120.
54. Research Interview#5-B, page 8.
55. Research Interview#5-A, page 7.
56. "How Do Tobacco Executives Live with Themselves?" New York Times
Magazine,March 20, 1994,40.
57. Research Interview#8-B, page 5.
58. Gordon McKibben,Cutting Edge: Gillette'sJourney to Global Leader
ship (Boston:HarvardBusinessSchoolPress, 1998),256.
59. Joseph F. Cullman 3d, Ym a Lucky Guy (Joseph F. Cullman 3d, 1998),
149.
60. Research Interview#5-A, page 10.Notes 269
CHAPTER 4
1. Winston S. Churchill, The Hinge of Fate (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1950), 61.
2. "Hermit Kingdom," Wall Street Journal, December 12, 1958, Al;
WilliamI. Walsh, The Rise and Declineofthe GreatAtlanticand Pacific
Tea Company(New Jersey: Lyle Stuart, Inc., 1986),74. Walsh states that
A&P hadsales of$3.2 billionin 1950 andwas thelargestprivatelyowned
companyand the largestretailorganizationin the world. Itssalesvolume
exceeded that of U.S. Steel and Standard Oil and was second only to
GeneralMotors in total sales volumefor corporationsofany kind.
3. "Hermit Kingdom,"Wall StreetJournal, December 12, 1958,Al.
4. "We ShouldHave Moved a LotSooner,"Forbes, May 15, 1976,99.
5. WilliamI. Walsh, The Rise and Declineofthe GreatAtlanticand Pacific
Tea Company (Lyle Stuart, Inc., 1986), 78-80; Fortune, March 1963,
105.
6. "We Should Have Moved a Lot Sooner," Forbes, May 15, 1976, 99;
"A&P's Ploy: CuttingPrices to Turn a Profit,"Business Week, May 20,
1972, 76; Fortune,March 1963, 105.
7. "AilingA&P," Wall StreetJournal,April 21, 1964,Al.
8. WilliamI. Walsh, The Rise and Declineofthe GreatAtlanticand Pacific
Tea Company(Lyle Stuart, Inc.,1986),103-105.
9. "A&P's Ploy: Cutting Prices to Turn a Profit,"Business Week, May 20,
1972, 76; "A&P's Trice War7 Bites Broadlyand Deeply,"BusinessWeek,
September30, 1972, 56; "BankingAgainstA&P," Time, December 11,
1972, 108; "HowA&P GotCreamed,"Fortune,January1973, 103; "A&P
Counts the Cost of Its Pyrrhic Victory,"Business Week, April 28, 1973,
117.
10. "StumblingGiant,"Wall StreetJournal,January10, 1978,Al.
11. "ShiftingGears:A&P's Price-CuttingDidn'tCreateKroger'sProblems.. ."
Forbes, November 1, 1972, 29; "SuperstoresMay Suit Customersto a
T-shirt or a T-bone," Wall Street Journal, March 13, 1973, Al; "Plain
and Fancy: SupermarketBoutiquesSpur Kroger'sGains,"Barrons, May
25, 1981, 37; "250,000 Unpaid Consultants,"Forbes, September 14,
1981, 147.
12. ResearchInterview#6-C, page 6.
13. "Krogerand Fred Meyer Merge toCreate No. 1U.S. GroceryBiz," Dis
countStore News, May 3, 1999, 1.
14. "TroubleStalks theAisles atA&P," BusinessWeek, September23, 1991,
60.
15. "PitneyBowes' Pep," FinancialWorld, April 11, 1962, 22; "No Middle
Ground," Forbes, January 1,1961, 75.
16. Moody'sIndustrialManual2000.
17. "Roy Ash Is Having Fun atAddressogrief-Multigrief,"Fortune, February
27, 1978,46; "How Roy Ash GotBurned,"Fortune,April 6, 1981,71.270 Notes
18. "Up from the Ashes," Forbes, April 16, 1979, 104; "AM International:
The Cash Bind That Threatens a Turnaround," BusinessWeek, August
18, 1980, 118; "Ash Forced out of Two AMPosts,"New York Times, Feb
ruary 24, 1981, Dl.
19. "Why Ash Was Ousted at AM International,"BusinessWeek, March 9,
1981, 32; "Roy Ash Resigns under Fire," Fortune, March 23, 1981, 16;
"How Roy Ash Got Burned,"Fortune, April 6, 1981, 71; "Up from the
Ashes," Forbes, April 16, 1979, 104; "AM Files Chapter 11," New York
Times,April 15, 1982, Dl.
20. "WhenTechnologyWas NotEnough,"BusinessWeek, January25, 1982,
62; "HowRoy Ash Got Burned,"Fortune,April 6, 1981, 71; "AM Inter
national: The Cash Bind That Threatens a Turnaround," Business Week,
August 18, 1980,118.
21. "WhenTechnologyWas NotEnough,"BusinessWeek, January25, 1982,
62; "AM's BrightestYears Now Dim Memories,"New York Times, April
15, 1982, Dl.
22. "How Roy Ash Got Burned,"Fortune,April 6, 1981, 71; "High-Tech
nology Dream Turns into a Nightmare,"FinancialTimes, March 2,
1982, 17.
23. "AM International: The Cash Bind That Threatens a Turnaround," Busi
ness Week, August 18, 1980, 118; "The UnflappableRoy Ash," Forbes,
December 8, 1980, 38.
24. "AM International: The Cash Bind That Threatens a Turnaround," Busi
ness Week, August 18, 1980, 118; "Ash Forced Out of Two AM Posts,"
New York Times, February24, 1981, Dl; "When TechnologyWas Not
Enough,"BusinessWeek, January25, 1982, 62.
25. Research Interview#9-G, page 12.
26. Research Interview#9-E, page 11.
27. Research Interview#9-C, page 17.
28. Research Interview#9-G, page 12.
29. Research Interview #9-1, page 21.
30. ResearchInterview#9-C, page 20; #9-1, pages 21-22;#9-D, page 11.
31. Winston S. Churchill, The Grand Alliance (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1950), 371.
32. Churchillcreatedthis specialunitandputa lotof weighton it.According
to Martin Gilbert, Churchill frequentlyconsultedhis StatisticalOffice,
which was headed by acivilian,ProfessorLindemenn,before he made
critical decisions. He directly and continuouslyasked them to "check
facts" on such importanttopics as munitionsproduction,imports and
shippinglosses, aircraftlosses, and aircraftproduction.Martin Gilbert,
The ChurchillWar Papers,vol. 2 (NewYork: W. W.Norton,1995),xvii.
33. WinstonS. Churchill,The GatheringStorm (Boston:HoughtonMifflin,
1948), 667.
34. Research Interview,#2-C, page 16.Notes 271
35. "Man of Steel: Correnti Hopes to Take Nucor to No. 1," Business
Journal-Charlotte,September 19, 1994, 3.
36. Standard& Poor'sIndustrySurveyDatabase,Metals:Industrial,Iron and
Steel,January18,2001, LeoJ. Larkin,metalsanalyst.
37. ResearchInterview#7-C, page13.
38. Research Interview#7-E, page 7; Jeffrey L. Rodengen, The Legend of
Nucor(Fort Lauderdale, Fla.: WriteStuff, 1997),45.
39. JeffreyL. Rodengen,The Legendof Nucor (Fort Lauderdale,Fla.: Write
Stuff, 1997), 39.
40. ResearchInterview#7-A, page 3.
41. Joseph F. Cullman 3d, Ym a Lucky Guy (Joseph F. Cullman 3d, 1998),
144; Richard Kluger,Ashes to Ashes (New York: AlfredA. Knopf. 1996),
485; "Beverage Management: Risky—but Straight Up 7UP," Forbes,
April 12,1982,208; "CokePeppers7UP andPepsi,"AdvertisingAge, Feb
ruary 24, 1986, 2, 86.
42. Joseph F. Cullman 3d, Ym a Lucky Guy (Joseph F. Cullman 3d,
1998), 147.
43. John Strohmeyer,Crisis in Bethlehem (Pittsburgh: Universityof Pitts
burgh Press, 1986), 72-73; "The Labors ofTrautlein,"Forbes, February
15, 1981, 36; "Bethlehem'sThin Slab Yawn," American Metal Market,
November 17, 1989, 4; "Bethlehem Museum," National Public Radio
transcript, July 5,1998.
44. "Upjohn:Safetyof Upjohn'sOral AntidiabeticDrug Doubtedin Study;
Firm Disputes Finding," Wall Street Journal, May 21, 1970, A6;
"Upjohn: A Bitter Pill for Upjohn Shareholders (Drug Company
InvolvedinAntibioticControversy),"FinancialWorld, January23, 1974,
28; "Upjohn: The Upjohn Company: Presentationby R. T. Parfet, Jr.,
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, and L. C. Hoff,
Vice Presidentand General Manager, PharmaceuticalDivision,to the
SecurityAnalysts of San Francisco, September 11, 1975," Wall Street
Transcript,October13, 1975,41648-41650;"Upjohn:Hair-RaisingHap
peningsat Upjohn (Testinga Curefor Baldness,the CompanySquirms
at the UnwelcomeClamor),"Fortune, April 6, 1981, 67-69; "Upjohn:
FDA Says UpjohnExaggeratedClaimsonDrug'sValue inTreatingBald
ness," Wall Street Journal, June 18, 1986, A6; "Upjohn: Riptide: Can
UpjohnManageIts Way outofa ProductGap? IfNot, ItCouldBe Swept
into the IndustryMerger Wave," FinancialWorld, September 5, 1989,
26-28; "Upjohn:The Corporation:Strategies:Will This FormulaCure
WhatAils Upjohn?As the SharksCircle,It's SpendingBig on R&D and
Marketing,"BusinessWeek, September18, 1989, 65; "Upjohn:Technol
ogy and Medicine:Upjohn Sleep Drug Being Investigatedfor Safetyby
FDA,"WallStreetJournal,September20,1984,B4; "Upjohn:Medicine:
Halcion Takes Another Hit: Tainted Data Played a Key Role in FDA
Approval,"Newsweek, February17, 1992, 58; "Upjohn:Medicine:Fuel-272 Notes
ing the Fireover Halcion: Upjohn'sOwn StaffHas Raised Safety Con
cerns,"Newsweek,May25, 1992, 84;"Upjohn:Top of theNews: Succes
sions:AtUpjohn,a GrimChangingofthe Guard:Ley SmithInheritsthe
Problem-PlaguedDrugmaker at a Critical Juncture," Business Week,
May 3,1993, 36.
45. Research Interview #11-B,page 7.
46. "No-Longer-So-GreatScott,"Forbes,August 1, 1972, 25.
47. "Scott Paper Back on ItsFeet,"Forbes, December 15,1976, 69-70.
48. "ScottIsn'tLumberingAnymore,"Fortune, September30, 1985,48-55.
49. "ScottPaper:Backon theAttack,"FinancialWorld,August1,1979,22-23;
"A PaperTigerGrows Claws,"BusinessWeek, August23, 1969, 100-102;
"Outlook for 1970-Year-End Statement,"Paper Trade Journal, Decem
ber 22,1969, 33;"ProfitsPeakforScott Paper,"FinancialWorld,April 22,
1970, 13, 28; "No-Longer-So-GreatScott,"Forbes,August1,1972,25.
50. Research Interview#5-F, page 2.
51. Research Interview#5-E, page 22.
52. Research Interview#6-A, page 19.
53. Ann Kaiser Stearns,ComingBack: RebuildingLives after Crisisand Loss
(New York: Ballantine,1988), 294. In her work, Stearns describes the
findingsofthese studies,which we believeprovide a scientificbasis for
understandingthe effectivenessof theStockdaleParadox.We were also
influencedbythe work of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi.In his comprehen
sive investigationinto the nature ofhappinessin thebook Flow, Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyidiscusses the transformationalpotential of apparent
tragedy,usingas anexamplethe studiesofProfessorFaustoMassiminiof
the Universityof Milan. In these studies, some paraplegicsand other
severely handicappedpeople asserted that their personal tragedies had
actuallyresultedin apositiveexperiencethatledthemto live fullerlives.
(Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi,Flow [New York: HarperPerennial,1990],
192-193.)Foranotherviewpointon this subject,also seethe work ofDr.
AlSiebert,who wroteThe SurvivorPersonality—HowLife'sBestSurvivors
Thrive inDifficultSituationsand ConvertMisfortuneinto Good Luck.
54. Fannie Mae got 9.3 percentfor its mortgage portfolio but had to pay
14.63 percentfor the short-termdebt it issued. "David Maxwell Takes
Over Troubled FannieMae," WashingtonPost, May 21, 1981; "Fannie
Mae Searchesfor HigherGround,"Fortune,July 13, 1981, 110.
55. "FannieMae Searchesfor HigherGround,"Fortune,July 13,1981, 110.
56. "FannieMaeSearchesfor HigherGround,"Fortune,July 13, 1981, 110.
57. Conversation with David Maxwell, November 14, 1997.
58. Tim Brooksand Earle Marsh,The CompleteDirectoryofPrimetimeNet
works and CableTVShows (NewYork: Ballantine, 1999),929.
59. Jim and Sybil Stockdale,In Love and War (Maryland: Naval Institute
Press, 1990); Stockdale Triumphs, video presentation—1994Stanford
Alumni Association (Stanford, Calif.).Notes 273
CHAPTER 5
1. Plato attributedthis pithyquote to the ScribesofDelphiinThe Protago
ras, 343B; Plato: The Protagoras and Meno Translated by W. K. C.
Guthrie(NewYork and London:PenguinClassics,1956),77.
2. IsaiahBerlin,The Hedgehogand the Fox (Chicago:ElephantPaperbacks,
1993).
3. Conversation with Marvin Bressler,October 2000.
4. ResearchInterview#10-F,page 3.
5. ResearchInterview#10-D,page 22.
6. "Conveniencewitha Difference,"Forbes, June 11, 1990.
7. WalgreensAnnualReport1998, 16.
8. "TurningIn," Forbes,April 13, 1981,96.
9. "TandyAgreesto Buy Assets ofEckerd Unit,"Wall StreetJournal,July 5,
1985, A4.
10. Moody'sIndustrialSubsidiaryList (MergentFIS, 2000).
11. LawrenceA. Cunninghamand Warren E. Buffett,The EssaysofWarren
Buffett: Lessonsfor CorporateAmerica (CunninghamGroup, Benjamin
N. CardozoSchoolofLaw, Yeshiva University1998),98.
12. "WarrenBuffett'sFavoriteBanker,"Forbes, October18, 1993,46.
13. "Wells Fargo Targets Southern California,"American Banker, July 10,
1987, 1;"WellsFargo to CutOverseasActivitiesto BoostItsProfit,"Wall
StreetJournal,May 3, 1985,A32; "WellsFargoTrims Its Sails,"American
Banker, May 3, 1985, 2; "A Banker Even Keynes Might Love," Forbes,
July 2, 1984,42.
14. "BankAmericaLaunchesProbe," Wall StreetJournal, January28, 1985,
A27; "MoreThan MortgagesAils BankAmerica,"Fortune,April 1, 1985,
50; "Big QuarterlyDeficitStuns BankAmerica,"Wall StreetJournal,July
18, 1985, Al; "Sam Armacost'sSea ofTroubles,"Banker, September1,
1985, 18.
15. ResearchInterview#11-H,pages 5, 13.
16. ResearchInterview#11-F,pages 5, 11.
17. "BootCampfor Bankers,"Forbes,July 23, 1990, 273.
18. "HospitalSuppliersStrike Back," New York Times, March 31, 1985, CI;
The AbbottAlmanac: 100 Years ofCommitmentto QualityHealth Care
(Elmsford,N.Y.: BenjaminCompany),1987, 170, 210; "Abbott:Profiting
from ProductsThat Cut Costs," Business Week, June 18, 1984, 56; "In
MedicalTesting,AbbottIs theName ofthe Game,"BusinessWeek, June
1,1987,90.
19. "Riptide:Can UpjohnManageIts Way out ofa ProductGap?"Financial
World, September 5, 1989, 26; "Upjohn: The Corporation:Strategies:
Will This Formula Cure What Ails Upjohn? As the Sharks Circle, It's
SpendingBig on R&D and Marketing,"Business Week, September18,
1989, 65.274 NotCS
20. "Riptide:Can UpjohnManageIts Way outofa ProductGap?"Financial
^ World, September5, 1989, 26.
21. "Upjohn: Mergers: Upjohn Finally Makes It to the Big Leagues: How
CEO ZabriskieEngineeredthePharmaciaMerger,"BusinessWeek, Sep
tember 4, 1995, 35.
22. 1960and 1961 AbbottAnnual Reports.
23. "Hasbro May Alter Bid to Appease Tonka Holders,"London Financial
Times,April 16, 1991, 26; "TonkaSays Yes toHasbro,"LondonFinancial
Times,April 19, 1991,30.
24. "Tobacco: Profit Despite Attacks," New York Times, January 25, 1979,
Dl.
25. James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras, Built to Last (New York: Harper
Collins, 1997), 86.
26. Bryan Burrough and John Helyar, Barbariansat the Gate (New York:
HarperCollins, 1991).
27. Research Interview#5-A, page 13.
28. "An Iconoclast in a Cutthroat World," ChiefExecutive,March 1996.
29. "GilletteHoldsIts Edge by EndlesslySearchingfor a BetterShave,"Wall
StreetJournal,December 10, 1992,Al.
30. Research Interview#3-G, page 7.
31. Thecomparisoncompaniesthatdisplayedanobsessionwith growthwere
Bank of America, Addressograph-Multigraph,Eckerd, Great Western
Financial,Silo, Upjohn,Warner-Lambert,Burroughs,Chrysler,Harris,
Rubbermaid, and Teledyne.
32. "TheWall StreetTranscript:CorporateCriticsConfidential:Savingsand
LoanIndustry,"Wall StreetJournal,June 12, 1989,93,903.
33. "How Playing It Safe Worked for Great Western,"Business Week, Sep
tember 7, 1987, 70.
34. "The Wall StreetTranscript:Remarks byJames F. Montgomeryto the
Boston SecurityAnalysts Society, October 8, 1985," Wall Street Tran
script, December23, 1985, 80245.
35. In alettertoCarl Seelig,Einsteinwrote,"Betweentheconceptionofthe
idea ofSpecialRelativityand the completionofthecorrespondingpubli
cation,there elapsedfive or six weeks. Butit would be hardlycorrectto
considerthis as a birthday,because earlierthe argumentsand building
blockswere beingpreparedover a periodofyears...." In aletterto R. S.
Shankland in 1952, he estimatedhe "had worked for ten years" on the
specialtheory.RonaldW. Clark,Einstein:The Life and Times (NewYork
and Cleveland:The World PublishingCompany,1971),74-85, 120.
CHAPTER 6
1. Viktor E. Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning (New York: Touchstone
Books, 1984), 134.Notes 275
2. Hoover's Online, www.hoovers.com.
3. ResearchInterview#1-E, page 11.
4. BernardH. Semler,PuttingItAll Together(autobiography,draftversion,
1998), 66.
5. BernardH. Semler,"MeasuringOperatingPerformance,"1.Articlesent
to the research teamdirectlyfrom Mr. Semler.
6. ResearchInterview#1-E, page 3.
7. "How 'Dr.' Ledder Cured Abbott Labs: Abbott Labs Was a Sick Com
pany.. ." Forbes, August 1, 1975, 26; "Abbott Shapes Up," Chemical
Week, October 20,1976, 20; "AbbottLabs: Adding HospitalSuppliesto
BolsterDrugOperations,"BusinessWeek, July 23, 1979, 177; "Earnings
Per Share for First Nine Months of 1980,"PR Newswire, September17,
1980;"RobertA. SchoellhornReporton Companyat Annual Sharehold
ersMeeting,"BusinessWire, April 13,1984;"Abbott:Profitingfrom Prod
ucts That Cut Costs,"BusinessWeek, June 18, 1984, 56.
8. ResearchInterview#1-G, page23.
9. ResearchInterview#2-E, page 1.
10. ResearchInterview#2-F, page 3.
11. "Managing:Carl E. Reichardt,Chairman,Wells Fargo & Co.,"Fortune,
February 27, 1989,42.
12. ResearchInterview#11-H,pages 5,9.
13. "Bold Banker: Wells Fargo Takeover of Crocker Is Yielding Profit but
Some Pain,"Wall StreetJournal,August5, 1986,Al.
14. ResearchInterview#11-H,pages 5,9, 16.
15. ResearchInterview#11-H,pages 5,9.
16. ResearchInterview#11-H,page 10.
17. "Managing:Carl E.Reichardt,Chairman,Wells Fargo & Co.,"Fortune,
February27, 1989,42;"A BankerEven KeynesMightLove,"Forbes,July
2, 1984, 40; "Bold Banker:Wells Fargo TakeoverofCrockerIsYielding
Profitbut Some Pain,"Wall StreetJournal,August5, 1986,Al.
18. Gary Hector, Breaking the Bank: The Decline of BankAmerica (Little,
Brown & Company, 1988),72.
19. Authorexperiencein the early 1980s.
20. "Asset or Liability?" Barron's, October 20, 1986, 13; "BankAmerica
Reportsa Small Profit,"Wall StreetJournal,January22, 1988,C4.
21. "AnotherBout ofAnxietyover Bank ofAmerica,"BusinessWeek, August
19, 1985, 33.
22. "ThingsAre AddingUpAgain at Burroughs,"BusinessWeek, March 11,
1967, 192; "Anatomyof a Turnaround," Forbes, November 1, 1968, 25;
"How Ray MacDonald'sGrowthTheoryCreatedIBM's ToughestCom
petitor," Fortune,January 1977,94.
23. "ThingsAre AddingUpAgain at Burroughs,"BusinessWeek, March 11,
1967, 192; "The BurroughsSyndrome,"Business Week, November 12,
1979, 82.
24. "The BurroughsSyndrome,"BusinessWeek, November12, 1979, 82.276 Notes
25. "Rubbermaid: TWST Names Award Winners Home Products: TWST
Names Stanley C. Gault, Chairman and CEO, Rubbermaid Inc., for
Gold Award, Home Products," Wall Street Transcript, April 18, 1988,
89116.
26. "Rubbermaid:Features:Marketing:The Billion-DollarDustpan," Indus
try Week, August1, 1988,46; "QualityofProducts,"Fortune,January 29,
1990,42.
27. "Rubbermaid: Rubbermaid's Impact: New Stick Items Plentiful as Ven
dors 'Spruce Up' HouseholdCleaning Utensils,"Housewares,January 1,
1990, 78.
28. "Chrysler'sNextGeneration," BusinessWeek, December 19, 1988, 52.
29. Lee IacoccawithWilliam Novak,Iacocca:AnAutobiography(NewYork:
Bantam, 1984), 161.
30. Lee IacoccawithWilliam Novak,Iacocca:AnAutobiography(NewYork:
Bantam, 1984), 162,163,170,199.
31. Lee Iacocca with WilliamNovak,Iacocca:AnAutobiography(NewYork:
Bantam, 1984), 196.
32. "Iacocca Hands Over the Keys to Chrysler," Investor's Business Daily,
January 4, 1993, 1.
33. "Mea Culpa," Wall StreetJournal, September 17,1990,Al.
34. "Chryslerto BuyAircraftMaker,"WallStreetJournal,June 20, 1985,A12.
35. "How Chrysler's $30,000 Sports Car Got Sideswiped,"Business Week,
January 23, 1989, 68.
36. "The Game's Not Over," Forbes,April 30, 1990,76.
37. "Into a Skid," The Economist,June 16, 1990, 70;"Afterthe Departure,"
Fortune, July 2, 1990, 55; "Can Iacocca Fix Chrysler Again?" Fortune,
April 8,1991,50.
38. Robert A. Lutz,Guts:TheSevenLawsofBusinessThatMade Chryslerthe
World's Hottest Car Company (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
1998), 27.
39. "The StudiedGambleof PitneyBowes,"Dun'sReview, February1967, 30.
40. "ToughChoice," Forbes, May 15, 1965, 18.
41. "Tough Choice," Forbes, May 15,1965, 18.
42. "ToughChoice," Forbes, May 15, 1965, 18.
43. "Fancy Footwork:Manager's Handbook,"Sales and MarketingManage
ment, July 1994,41.
44. "PitneyBowes: JumpingAhead byGoing High Tech,"Fortune,October
19, 1992, 113; "Changes in Tax Law and Its Effects on Leasing Equip
ment," Advantage,July 1988, 28.
45. "Old-LineSellingfor NewSmokes Wins forReynolds,"BusinessWeek?
February 20, 1960, 74; InternationalDirectory of Company Histories
(Chicago: St. JamesPress, 1991),410.
46. "Voyage into the Unknown,"Forbes, December 1, 1971, 30; Bryan Bur-
rough and John Helyar, Barbarians at the Gate (New York: Harper
Collins, 1991), 51.Notes 277
47. "Voyage into the Unknown," Forbes, December 1, 1971, 30; Bryan Bur-
rough and John Helyar, Barbarians at the Gate (New York: Harper
Collins, 1991), 51.
48. "When MarketingTakesOver at R. J. Reynolds,"BusinessWeek, Novem
ber 13, 1978, 82; "Voyage into the Unknown," Forbes, December 1,
1971, 30. RJR purchased McLean Industries in 1969 and Aminoil less
than a year later. The article citedabove ("When MarketingTakes .. .")
states that in 1978 RJR committed a further $580 million on top of the
$1.5 billion they spent in"earlieryears." Thus, over approximatelyten
years, they poured over $2 billion into Sea-Land. Net stockholders'
equity in 1978 was $2,657,900,000according to the 1979 Moody's
Report.
49. Bryan Burrough and John Helyar, Barbariansat the Gate (New York:
HarperCollins, 1991), 62; "Cigarette Conglomerate,"FinancialWorld,
February 5, 1969, 4; "New Fields for Reynolds Tobacco," Financial
World, May 6, 1970, 13; "The Two-Tier Market Still Lives. . ." Forbes,
March 1, 1974, 25;"R.J. ReynoldsStopsa Slide in MarketShare,"Busi
ness Week, January 26, 1976,92.
50. "Voyageinto the Unknown,"Forbes, December 1, 1971, 36.
51. Ken Iverson,Plain Talk (NewYork: John Wiley& Sons, 1998), 54-59.
52. "The Nucor Story,"page 5 (documentobtainedfrom the Nucor Corpo
ration)—chairman/vicechairman/president,vice president/generalman
ager, departmentmanager,supervisory/professional,hourlyemployee.
53. Richard Preston, AmericanSteel(NewYork: Avon, 1991),4-5.
54. JeffreyL. Rodengen,The LegendofNucorCorporation(FortLauderdale,
Fla.: Write Stuff, 1997), 73-74; "The Nucor Story" (Nucor Web
site)/EgalitarianBenefits,August22, 1997.
55. ResearchInterview#7-G, page4.
56. "MaverickRemakes Old-Line Steel: Nucor's Ken Iverson. . ." Industry
Week, January 21, 1991,26.
57. Ken Iverson,Plain Talk (NewYork: JohnWiley& Sons, 1998), 14.
58. Richard Preston, AmericanSteel (NewYork: Avon, 1991), 5.
59. "Hot Steel and Good Common Sense," ManagementReview, August
1992, 25.
60. John Strohmeyer,Crisis in Bethlehem (Pittsburgh: Universityof Pitts
burgh Press, 1986), 34.
61. John Strohmeyer,Crisis in Bethlehem (Pittsburgh:Universityof Pitts
burgh Press, 1986), 30-35, 86.
62. Hoover's Online.
63. Hoover's Online.
64. JeffreyL. Rodengen,The LegendofNucorCorporation(FortLauderdale,
Fla.: Write Stuff, 1997), 101.
65. "Report of Darwin E. Smith to the Stockholders and the Men and
Women ofKimberly-ClarkCorporation,"February28, 1972.
66. ResearchInterview#5-E, page 10.278 Notes
67. "Rae TakesOn PaperIndustry'sToughLone Wolf,"GlobeandMail, July
20, 1991, Bl.
CHAPTER 7
1. "First Inaugural Address,March 4, 1933," Gorton Carruth and Eugene
Ehrlich, The HarperBook ofAmericanQuotations(NewYork: Harper &
Row, 1988), 230.
2. Drugstore.com 10K report filed February 28, 2000, page 28. "We
incurred net losses of $123.9 million from the period from inception
throughJanuary2, 2000. Webelievethat wewill continue to incur oper
ating and net losses for at leastthe nextfour years (and possiblylonger)
and that the rate at which we will incur such losses will increase signifi
cantlyfrom current levels.We intend toincreaseour operatingexpenses
substantiallyas we: Increase our sales and marketing activities,particu
larlyadvertisingefforts...."
3. "There's No BusinessLike No Business,"Industry Standard,August 7,
2000,43.
4. "The Reluctant Webster," Forbes, October 18, 1999, 80.
5. "The Reluctant Webster," Forbes, October 18, 1999, 78.
6. "Strugglingdrugstore.comCuts Staff: Online RetailerFires 60 Employ
ees—10 Percent of Workforce,"Seattle Post-Intelligencer,October 21,
2000.
7. Drug Topics, February 3, 1997, 90; "Fleet-FootedPharmacy," Uplink
Magazine,a publicationofHughesCommunications,Fall 1996.
8. "Walgreen—PharmacyChain ofthe Year, 1990,"Drug Topics,April 23,
1990, 12.
9. "Walgreen-PharmacyChain ofthe Year, 1990,"Drug Topics,April 23,
1990, 12.
10. "WalgreensSpecialReport: Firstin Pharmacy,"Drug Store News, Octo
ber 16,1995, 27, 30.
11. Data takendirectlyfrom annual reportsand 10K reports,1971-1999.
12. "Plain and Fancy: SupermarketBoutiques Spur Kroger's Gains," Bar
ron's, May25, 1981, 37;"There's a Lot of LifeLeftin theKrogerRecap,"
BusinessWeek, December 5, 1988, 164; "How BorrowingBought Kroger
More Than Time," BusinessWeek, February 26, 1990, 71.
13. "Gillette Knows Shaving—andHow to Turn Out Hot New Products,"
Fortune,October 14, 1996.
14.."Gillette: Gillette Sensor:A Case History,"corporate paper, January 17,
1991,9;"Gillette:Howa $4RazorEndsUp Costing$300 Million,"Busi
ness Week, January 29, 1990,62.
15. "Gillette:At Gillette, DisposableIs a DirtyWord," BusinessWeek, May
29,1989, 58.
16. Research Interview #3-E, page 13.Notes 279
17. Research Interview #3-E, page 13.
18. Research Interview#3-F, page 5.
19. Research Interview#3-E, page 13.
20. Prominent physicistsof the time hadalreadydevelopedsimilartheories,
bolsteredby remarkablygood experimentalevidence,that were mathe
maticallyconsistent and equivalent to Einstein'sexpositionof relativity
theory.All theylacked was the clearstatementofa fundamentalprinciple
to startthe chain of thinkingthat resultedin a clear picture ofrelativity
theory and its consequences. In UnderstandingRelativity, by Stanley
Goldberg(Boston: Birkhauser,1984),the author points out, "There was
not complete satisfactionwith the theorythat Lorentz and Poincare pro
duced in 1904, although thattheorywas formally identicalto the theory
that Einstein introduced a yearlater"(page 324). (Emphasisadded.)
21. "Who Mattered and Why,"Time, December 31, 1999,48-58.
22. Richard Preston, AmericanSteel (New York: Avon, 1991), 75.
23. Research Interview#7-E, pages 2-3.
24. "Nucor Corporation: Corporate Profile,"Wall StreetCorporateReporter,
September 9-15, 1996, 19.
25. Clayton M. Christensen, The Innovator's Dilemma (Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 1997), 88.
26. "Daniel S. Bricklin," CIO, December 15, 1999, 140.
27. "As Easyas Lotus 1-2-3,"Computerworld,August30, 1999,71.
28. "Everyday Necessities, the Building Blocks," InfoWorld, October 26,
1998, 9; "IBM and Lotus Get Closer," InformationWeek,July 28, 1997,
73-80.
29. "BiggerIsn't Better:The Evolutionof Portables,"InfoWorld,October 26,
1998, 8-9.
30. Thomas J. Watson Jr. and Peter Petre,Father,Son 6 Co.: (New York: Ban
tam, 2001), 229.
31. Robert J. Serling, Legend and Legacy (New York: St. Martin's Press,
1992), 126.
32. CentennialReview, Internal WestinghouseDocument, 1986.
33. "The Rise of Personal Digital Assistants," Systems, September 1992,
70-72; "UsersMourn Newton," Computerworld,March 9, 1998,61-64.
34. Kara Swisher, aol.com (New York: Random House, 1998), 64.
35. Research Interview#9-D, page 11.
36. Research Interview#5-E, page 5.
CHAPTER 8
1. Quoted by Lorin Maazel, music director, New York Philharmonic,
"Maazel Is to Lead Philharmonic," New York Times, January 30, 2001,
Al.
2. "Some PeopleDon't Liketo Haggle,"Forbes,August27, 1984,46.280 Notes
3. Carl M. Brauer,"CircuitCity Stores:CustomerSatisfaction,Never Self-
Satisfaction"(draft,April 1998),6-1.
4. Total number of articles on good-to-great companies, pretransition
decade = 176,posttransitiondecade = 423. Total number offeature arti
cles on good-to-greatcompanies,pretransitiondecade = 21, posttransi
tion decade = 67.
5. JeffreyL. Rodengen,The LegendofNucor (Fort Lauderdale,Fla.: Write
Stuff, 1997), 63, 70, 82.
6. ResearchInterview#5-B, page 5.
7. ResearchInterview#5-C,page 2.
8. "The Batde of the Bottoms,"Forbes, March 24, 1997, 98.
9. ResearchInterview#1-C, page 7.
10. ResearchInterview#1-E, page 9.
11. Conversation between the author and Alan Wurtzel.
12. ResearchInterview#3-B, page 13.
13. Research Interview #4-D, page 3. The interviewee in this case was
respondingto the question,"Did the company make a consciousdeci
sion to initiatea major change or transitionat some point during that
time frame?"
14. ResearchInterview#5-A, page 7.
15. ResearchInterview#6-A, page 12.
16. ResearchInterview#7-A, page 3.
17. ResearchInterview#8-C,page6.
18. ResearchInterview#9-F, page 25.
19. ResearchInterview#10-F,page 7.
20. ResearchInterview#11-G,page 6.
21. John Woodenand Jack Tobin,They CallMe Coach (Chicago:Contem
porary, 1988), 244.
22. ResearchInterview#3-1, page21.
23. ResearchInterview#1-G, page 31; ResearchInterview#1-A, page 14.
24. "Upjohn:The Upjohn Company:RemarksbyC. H. Ludlow,Vice Presi
dent andTreasurer,and L. C.Hoff, Vice President,beforethe Washing
ton Society of Investment Analysts," February 20, 1974, Wall Street
Transcript,March 11, 1974, 36246-36247.
25. ResearchInterview#6-C,pages 16-17.
26. ResearchInterview#7-F, page 11.
27. Fortune 1000 rankings,from Fortune.comWebsite, February9, 2001.
28. "TurningW-L into a MarketingConglomerate,"BusinessWeek, March
5, 1979, 60; "Warner-Lambert,"Wall StreetTranscript,January 7, 1980,
56636.
29. "Chasing after Merck,"Forbes, November 10, 1980,36.
30. "Warner-LambertCompany," Wall Street Transcript, December 21,
1981,64122.
31. "Warner-Lambert,"FinancialWorld, September 5,1989, 24.
32. "On the Mend," Barron's,January2, 1995, 19.Notes 281
33. "W-L to Acquire IMED at Cost of $465 Million,"NewYork Times, June
8,1982, D4; "W-LPlan to BuyImed Corp. DrawsCool Reaction byAna
lysts Due to Cost,Timing,"WallStreetJournal,June 14,1982,A41; "W-L
to Dump Imed," San DiegoBusinessJournal, December 2, 1985, 1.
34. The Warner-LambertWebsite no longerexistsand youareautomatically
directed to the Pfizer site. Furthermore, the site includes information on
how Warner-Lambertstockholderscan exchange their shares for Pfizer
stock.
35. Peter F. Drucker, Managingfor the Future (NewYork: Truman Talley
Books/Dutton, 1992), 160.
36. "In the News,"Fortune,July 3,1978, 20.
37. "HarrisIsRaisingItsBeton the Officeofthe Future,"BusinessWeek, July
18,1983,134.
38. "HarrisCorp.'s Bold Strategy,"Forbes, April 25, 1983, 96; "HarrisIs Rais
ingItsBeton the Officeofthe Future,"BusinessWeek, July 18,1983,134.
39. "Merits of Harris Tie to Lanier Debated,"New York Times, August 11,
1983, D5, plusannualfinancialstatementsdrawn from Moody'sreports.
40. "HarrisHeads into theOffice,"Computerworld,October 12,1983, 29.
CHAPTE R 9
1. Michael Ray and Rochelle Myers, Creativity in Business (New York:
Doubleday& Company, 1986), 113.
2. Hoover's Online and Standard & Poor's CorporationRecords, January
2001.
3. Sam WaltonwithJohn Huey, Sam Walton:Made inAmerica (NewYork:
Doubleday & Company, 1992), 35.
4. SandraS. Vance and Roy V. Scott,Wal-Mart:AHistoryofSam Walton's
RetailPhenomenon(New York: Twayne, 1994) 169-171;Bob Ortega,In
SamWe Trust (NewYork: Times Books, 1998).
5. Research done for the Built to Last study; original sources courtesyof
Hewlett-PackardCompanyArchives.
6. Research done for-the Built to Last study; original sources courtesyof
Hewlett-PackardCompanyArchives.
7. Letter from Bernard M. Oliver to IEEE Awards Board, May 23, 1972,
courtesyof Hewlett-PackardCompanyArchives.
8. "PackardStyle,"PaloAlto DailyNews, March 27,1996, 10.
9. Accordingto Amy Chamberlain, of theDavid and Lucile PackardFoun
dation, the amount was $5.62 billion as of the date the funds were
received.
10. James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras, Built to Last (New York: Harper
Collins, 1997), 1.
11. David Packard, CommencementSpeech, Colorado College, June 1,
1964,courtesyof Hewlett-PackardCompanyArchives.282 Notes
12. Merck & Company, Management Guide, Corporate Policy Statement,
February 3, 1989, courtesy of Merck & Company; George W. Merck,
"An Essential Partnership—the Chemical Industry and Medicine,"
speech presented to the Division of Medicinal Chemistry, American
Chemical Society, April 22, 1935; 1991 Merck & Company Annual
Report, inside cover; David Bollierand Kirk O. Hansen, Merck & Co.
(A-D), BusinessEnterprise Trust Case, No. 90-013,case D, 3.
13. George W. Merck, Speech at the Medical College of Virginia at Rich
mond, December 1, 1950,courtesyof Merck & CompanyArchives.
14. Richard Schickel, The Disney Version (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1968), 310.
15. Harold Mansfield,Vision: A Saga of the Sky (NewYork: Madison Pub
lishingAssociates,1986), 167-201.
16. RobertJ. Serling, LegendandLegacy(NewYork: St. Martin's Press),79.
17. Robert J. Serling, Legend and Legacy (New York: St. Martin's Press),
20-22,132.
18. Accordingto "How Boeing Bet the Company and Won," in Audacity,
winter 1993, 52, and RobertJ. Serling,the project would cost between
$15 and $16 million. We verifiedthe $15 million figure with Boeing's
income statementsand balance sheetsfor the period 1947-1951.
19. RobertJ. Serling,Legendand Legacy(NewYork: St.Martin'sPress),159,
323,400-405,409.
20. Standard & Poor's Industry Surveys: Aerospace and Defense, February
15, 2001, Robert E. Friedman, CPA, Aerospace and Defense Analyst.
Also, in 1999,Boeinghad twicethe revenuesofAirbusin thissegmentof
the industry ($38,409,000,000versus $16,817,000,000)according to
Hoover's Online.
APPEN DIX 8.A
1. "Hermit Kingdom," Wall Street Journal, December 12, 1958, A6;
"Remodelingthe A&P," Business Week, March 23, 1963, 36; "Ailing
A&P," Wall StreetJournal,April 21, 1964,A6; "NewMen for A&P'sTop
Rungs," Business Week, June 20, 1964, 32; "A&P Reorganization Is
Announced; Move Takes EffectFebruary24,",Wall StreetJournal,Janu
ary 15, 1969, A4; "A&P-Awakeningthe Giant,"FinancialWorld, Feb
ruary 25, 1970, 5; "Great Expectations,"Barron's, January 19, 1970, 5;
"RenewingA&P,"BusinessWeek, February20,1971,68; "HowA&P Got
Creamed," Fortune, January 1973, 103; "A&P Goes outside Ranks for
First Time, Picks Scott to Assume EventualCommand," WallStreetJour
nal, December 11,1974, A8.
2, "IBM's New Copier," Business Week, March 22, 1976, 52; "Addresso-
graph Gets Ash and $2.7 Million,"BusinessWeek, October4, 1976, 31;
"How to Nip Away at the Xerox Market,"Business Week, November 8,Notes 283
1976, 68; "Roy Ash's Challenge," Newsweek, December 13, 1976, 90;
"RoyAsh Is Having Fun at Addressogrief-Multigrief,"Fortune, February
27, 1978, 46; "Coup at AM; Roy Ash Resigns Under Fire," Time, March
23, 1981, 71; "Curious Tale of Mr. Black," LondonFinancial Times, Feb
ruary 27, 1982, 28; "AM Files Chapter 11 Petition," New York Times,
April 15, 1982,Dl.
3. Gary Hector, Breaking the Bank: The Decline of BankAmerica (Little,
Brown & Company, 1988); "At BankAmericaa New Regime Strives to
Reverse Declines," Wall StreetJournal, May 20, 1982,Al; "The Cost to
Armacost,"Economist,February 16, 1985, 76; "Bank of America Rushes
into the Information Age," Business Week, April 15, 1985, 110; "Sam
Armacost's Sea of Troubles," Banker, September 1, 1985, 1; "Schwab
Joinsthe RanksofBankof AmericaDropouts,"BusinessWeek, August25,
1986, 37; "Add Security Pacific to Bank of America,"WallStreetJournal,
August 13, 1991, Al; "BankAmericaFinds It Got a Lot of Woe," Wall
StreetJournal,July 22, 1993,Al.
4. John Strohmeyer, Crisis in Bethlehem (Pittsburgh:Universityof Pitts
burgh Press, 1994); "Bethlehem Steel," Wall Street Journal, May 13,
1977, A4; "Bethlehem Sets New Pay Reduction," Wall Street Journal,
January 21,1983, A5;"Bethlehem to Ask Probe," WallStreetJournal,Jan
uary 24, 1984, A2; "Making Retirees Share the Pain," Business Week,
April 16, 1984, 50;"Bethlehem Plans Further Cuts," WallStreetJournal,
January 15, 1985, A2; "Is Bethlehem Investing in a Future It Doesn't
Have?" Business Week, July 8 1985, 56; "Bethlehem Exits Freight Car
Building,"JournalofCommerce,November1, 1991, B2; "FadedGlory,"
Forbes, March 16, 1992,40.
5. "TandyAgreesto BuyAssets of EckerdUnit,"Wall StreetJournal,July 5,
1985,A4; "DiversificationAppeals,"ChainStoreAge Executive,August1,
1979, 81; "Video Follies,"Forbes, November 5, 1984, 43-45; "Jack Eck
erd HoldersWill ReceiveAll Cash in a $1.2 BillionBuyout,"Wall Street
Journal, April 21, 1986, A31; "J.C. Penney Gets Eckerd Shares," Wall
StreetJournal,December 18, 1996, B10.
6. "Great Western: Great Western Financial Corporation: Remarks by
James F. Montgomery,President,to the SecurityAnalysts of San Fran
cisco, March 8, 1977," Wall Street Transcript, April 25, 1977,
46873-46874; "Great Western: Great Western Financial Corporation:
Remarks by James F. Montgomery, Chairman and President, to the
Security Analystsof San Francisco, November 9,1981," WallStreetTran
script, December 21, 1981, 64131-64132; "Great Western: Great West
ern Financial Corporation(GWF): Remarks by James F. Montgomery,
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, to the Los Angeles Society of
FinancialAnalysts,September11, 1984,"WallStreetTranscript,October
22, 1984, 75659-75660;"Great Western: The Corporation: Strategies:
How PlayingIt Safe Worked for GreatWestern: It Waited until Regula
tions Eased to Go on a Buying Spree," Business Week, September 7,284 Notes
1987, 70; "Great Western: Corporate Focus: Great Western Financial
Seeks to Chart a Fresh Course: No. 2 U.S. Thrift Faces Burden of Soured
Home Loans,BloatedOverhead,"WallStreetJournal,May 17,1993,B4.
7. Bryan Burrough and John Helyar, Barbariansat the Gate (New York:
HarperCollins,1991);"CigaretteConglomerate,"FinancialWorld, Feb
ruary 5, 1969,4; "Voyageinto the Unkown,"Forbes, December 1, 1971,
30; "When Marketing Takes Over at R.J. Reynolds," Business Week,
November 13, 1978,82.
8. "A PaperTigerGrows Claws,"BusinessWeek, August23, 1969, 100-102;
"No-Longer-So-GreatScott,"Forbes, August 1, 1972, 25; "Now an Out
siderWill Run ScottPaper,"BusinessWeek, April 23,1979, 39,42; "Scott
a Paper Tiger," AdvertisingAge, November 3, 1980, 96; "Scott Paper's
New Chief," Business Week, November 30, 1981, 62; "Scott Isn't Lum
beringAnymore,"Fortune,September30,1985,48-55; "BermudaTrian
gle," Forbes, January 6, 1992, 284; "Al Dunlap: An Insider's View,"
Navigator, December .1997; "Did CEO Dunlap Save Scott Paper—or
Just PrettyIt Up? The Shredder,"BusinessWeek, January 15,1996.
9. "Silo, Discount Appliance Chain, Enjoys Payofffrom Hard Sell," Bar
ron's, March 29, 1971,35;"An ApplianceDealer with Real Clout,"Busi
ness Week, November 6, 1971, 76; "CyclopsAcquires Silo,"Wall Street
Journal, October 16, 1979, A5; "Dixons Makes $384 Million U.S. Bid,"
LondonFinancialTimes, February 18, 1987, 1;"Silo-DixonsPower: How
Far Can It Reach?" ConsumerElectronics,November 1988, 14; "Dixons
StrategicMoveinto LosAngelesArea,"LondonFinancialTimes, Novem
ber 12, 1989, 10; "Shake-up at Silo," Discount Store News, March 4,
1991, 1; "DixonsTightens Grip on Silo," HFD-the Weekly Home Fur
nishingsNewspaper,February3, 1992, 77.
10. "Upjohn: Two Upjohn AntibioticsBarred from Sale; FDA-Drug Com
pany Confrontation Is Seen," Wall Street Journal, May 15, 1969, A38;
"Upjohn: Tweedle Dee: Upjohn Can't Ever Seem to Do Quite as Well
in Ethical Drugs as Tweedle Dum, Its Corporate Lookalike,Eli Lilly,
Which Is No Great Shakes Either," Forbes, March 1, 1970, 65-66;
"Upjohn: Two Upjohn Drugs Linked toThirty-twoDeaths Needn't Be
Banned, FDAAide Testifies,"WallStreetJournal,January 30, 1975,A14;
"Upjohn: Hair-RaisingHappenings at Upjohn (Testing a Cure for Bald
ness,the Company Squirms at the Unwelcome Clamor)," Fortune,April
6,1981,67-69; "Upjohn: R&DScoreboard:Drugs,"BusinessWeek, June
22, 1987, 145;"Upjohn: Upjohn's StockFallson Study's Claim Its Anti-
BaldnessDrug Has SideEffects,"Wall StreetJournal, February9, 1988,
A2; "Upjohn: Law: Upjohn SettlesLiabilitySuit over Haldion Sleeping
Pill," Wall StreetJournal,August12, 1991, B2.
11. "Gillette President S. K. Hensley Resigns to Accept Presidency of
Warner-Lambert,"Wall Street Journal, June 21, 1967, A32; "Say Little,
Do Much," Forbes, December 1, 1974, 52; "After the Diversification
That Failed," BusinessWeek, February28, 1977,58;"Turning W-L into aNotes 285
Marketing Conglomerate,"Business Week, March 5, 1979, 60; "Hagan
Outlines StrategicPlan," PRNewswire, October 29, 1980; "Beatingthe
Japanesein Japan," Forbes,April 27,1981,44; "W-L: ReversingDirection
to CorrectNeglect,"BusinessWeek, June 15, 1981, 65; "HaganOutlines
StrategicActions,"PR Newswire,December2, 1981;"HaganAnnounces
IMED Purchase," PR Newswire, June 7, 1982; "Hagan Defends IMED
Purchase,"PR Newswire,July 12, 1982; "Did W-L Makea $468 Million
Mistake?" Business Week, November 21, 1983, 123; "The Succession at
Warner-Lambert,"BusinessWeek, September 17, 1984, 52.
12. "Things AreAdding Up Again at Burroughs,"BusinessWeek, March 11,
1967, 192; "How Ray MacDonald's Growth Theory Created IBM's
Toughest Competitor," Fortune,January 1977,94; "ATough 'Street Kid'
Steps in at Burroughs," Business Week, October 29, 1979, 50; "Will a
Shake-up ReviveBurroughs?"BusinessWeek, May4, 1981, 53;"Can Bur
roughsCatch Up Again?"Forbes, March 28, 1983, 78.
13. RobertA. Lutz, Guts: The SevenLaws ofBusinessThatMade Chryslerthe
World'sHottestCarCompany(NewYork: John Wiley & Sons, 1998),27;
"President Iacocca," Wall Street Journal, June 28, 1982, Al; "Is There
Life after Iacocca?" Forbes, April 8, 1985, 75; "Lee Iacocca's Time of
Trouble," Fortune, March 14, 1988, 79; "Can Iacocca Fix Chrysler
Again?" Fortune, April 8, 1991, 50; "After Lee," The Economist,March
21, 1992, 70; "HowChryslerFilled Detroit'sBiggestShoes,"Wall Street
Journal,September7,1994, Bl; "Daimler-BenzWillAcquireChryslerin
$36 BillionDeal That Will Reshape Industry,"New York Times, May 7,
1998, A6.
14. "Harris-Intertype,RadiationInc. DirectorsApprove Merger PactValued
at $39 Million,"Wall StreetJournal, April 3, 1967, 30; "CriticalMass?"
Forbes, April 15, 1976, 86; "TechnologyTransfer's Master," Business
Week, October 10, 1977, 120; "HarrisCorp.'s RemarkableMetamorpho
sis," Forbes, May 26, 1980, 45; "Harris Corp.'s Bold Strategy,"Forbes,
April 25, 1983,96; "HarrisIsRaisingItsBeton the Officeof the Future,"
BusinessWeek, July 18,1983, 134; "HarrisCorp. Elects Hartleyto Added
Post of Chief,"Wall StreetJournal,April 1, 1986,A45; "New Harris Pres
ident PrefersGrowthto Downsizing,"UPI,April 23, 1993.
15. "Hasbro: On a Roll: ToymakerHasbro Continues String of 25% Yearly
Growth,"Barron's,July 19,1982, 40; "Hasbro: HasbroToys Find Profits
in Tradition," Wall Street Journal, December 12, 1983, A29; "Hasbro:
News: Hasbro Gets Its Guns: StephenHassenfeld'sLoading Up for Bat
tle," Industry Week, April 30, 1984, 17-18; "Hasbro: Silver: A Play on
Toys: Hasbro Bradley'sHassenfeld,"FinancialWorld, April 16, 1985, 29;
"Hasbro:MerryChristmas:It HasAlreadyCome forHasbro,BiggestU.S.
Toymaker,"Barron's, December 23, 1985, 34; "Hasbro: The Corpora
tion: Strategies:How Hasbro Became Kingof theToymakers:With $1.2
Billion in Sales and $99 Million in Profits, It Is Now No. 1 Worldwide,"
Business Week, September 22, 1986, 90-92; "Hasbro: Marketing:Toys:286 Notes
It's Kid Brother'sTurn to Keep Hasbro Hot: Alan HassenfeldMust Fill
BigShoesat the Toymaker,"BusinessWeek, June 26, 1989, 152-153.
16. "Rubbermaid:SincereTyranny(Why Has StanleyGault Spentthe Last
FourYears Movingand Shakingat Rubbermaid?It Was a Case of Serious
Problems Masked by Cheery Numbers)," Forbes, January 28, 1985,
54-55;"Rubbermaid:RubbermaidEmergesa 'Clear' Winner; Food Stor
age Containers," Chain Store Age—GeneralMerchandiseTrends, Octo
ber 1986, 67; "Why the Bounce at Rubbermaid?The Company Sells
Humdrum Goods in a Mature Market, and Most of Its Competitors
Undercut Its Prices. But It Has DoubledSales and Tripled Earnings in
the Past SixYears,"Fortune,April 13, 1987,77-78; "Rubbermaid: Amer
ica's Most Admired Company,"Fortune, Feburary7, 1994, 50-54; "Rub
bermaid: From the Most Admired to Just Acquired: How Rubbermaid
Managedto Fail,"Fortune,November23, 1998, 32-33.
17. "Henry Singleton's Singular Conglomerate,"Forbes, May 1, 1976, 38;
"Two Ph.D.'s Turn Teledyne into a Cash Machine," Business Week,
November 22, 1976, 133; "The Sphinx Speaks," Forbes, February 20,
1978, 33; "Teledyne's Winning Roster," Forbes, August 17, 1981, 35;
"Partingwith Henry Singleton:Such Sweet SorrowforTeledyne?"Busi
ness Week, April9,1990,81;"TeledynetoPay $17.5 Millionto SettleU.S.
Criminal Charges,"WashingtonPost, October 6, 1992, D6; "Teledyne
Strugglesto RecaptureMagic ofYesterday,"Wall StreetJournal, Novem
ber 22,1993, B4;"RichardSimmonsto Share SpotlightatAlleghenyTele
dyne, Sees 'Good' Fit,"Wall StreetJournal,April 3, 1996,B8.INDEX
Page numbersin italicsreferto figuresand illustrations.
A&P, 8, 65, 86, 141,148, 157, 250, 259
Doom Loop behaviorof, 254
familydomination of, 67-68
Forbes'sdescription of, 67
Golden Keyexperiment of, 68
Krogercompared with, 65-69, 66, 141
Abbott Laboratories, 8, 141
in acquisitionsanalysis,259
"best in theworld" understandingof,
101
Blue Plans of, 173
Cain's tenure at, 30-31
comparisoncandidates for, 7-8, 229
culture of discipline at, 122-23
economic denominator insightof, 106
executive interviews at, 239
good-to-greatperformance of, 7
industry performance and, 252
inside vs. outside CEO analysisof,
249
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
170
short-termpressuresand, 173-74
technologyacceleratorof, 150
Upjohn compared with, 98-99,
173-74, J74
seealso Cain, George
acquisitions, 11
good-to-greatstudy unit on, 241-42
misguided use of, 180-81
Addressograph,8, 86, 250, 259
Doom Loop behavior of, 254
Pitney Bowesvs.,70-72, 71
Aders, Robert, 81-82
"Adventure of Silver Blaze, The"
(Doyle), 10
Airbus, 203
Aldinger,Bill,43
alignment, 11
Flywheeland, 176, 177-78, 187
Level 5 Leadership and,
177-78
Allegheny,48, 258
Allen, Bill, 203
Allen, Fred, 28, 133-34
seealso Pitney Bowes
Amazon.com, 146, 154
American Express, 188
American Home Video Corporation,
94,255
Amgen, 120, 122
Aminoil, 135
AND, genius of, 198-200
AOL, 158
Appert,Dick, 59, 62
Apple Computer, 158
Arbuckle, Ernie, 42
Armacost, Sam, 43
Ash, Roy, 70-72, 74
AT&T, 134288 Index
Auchter, Dick, 59
Aycock,David, 76
Bagley,Brian, 189
Bankers Trust, 43
bankingindustry,42-44, 78, 104, 105,
128
Bank of America, 8, 72, 78, 250,
260
Doom Loop behaviorof,97, 128-29,
254
layoffsat, 53-54
"weakgenerals,stronglieutenants"
model of, 43
WellsFargo vs., 43-44,44, 53-54, 86,
128-29
Barbariansat theGate (Burroughand
Helyar),109
bar code scanners, 148-49
Berlin, Isaiah, 90-91
"best in theworld"question,95, 96,
97-103,118
Bethlehem Steel, 8, 34, 78, 86,138, 139,
167, 250, 259
Doom Loop behavior of, 255
technologyand demise of, 156-57
Bezos, Jeff, 154
"biggestdog"syndrome,26
BigHairy AudaciousGoals (BHAGs),
197-204
BiographicalDictionaryofAmerican
Business Leaders, 236
blame, 77-78, 88
Blue Plans, 173
board of directors, 216
Boeing, 6, 109,158,202-4
Boyd, Joseph, 181
BreakingtheBank (Hector),43, 129
Bressler, Marvin, 91
Briggs,William P., 212
Bruckart, Walter, 55
brutal facts, 65-89, 161
charismaticleadershipand, 72-73, 89
clockbuilding idea and, 199
and conductingautopsieswithout
blame, 77-78, 88
core ideologyidea and, 199
dialogue,debate and, 75-77, 88
disciplineand, 126
faith and, 80-85
genius of AND idea and, 199
hardiness factor and, 82
Kroger'sriseand, 65-69, 70
and leadingwith questions,74-75,
88
motivation and, 73-74, 75, 89
preservethe core/stimulateprogress
idea and, 199
red flag mechanismsand, 78-79, 88
short paydeviceand, 79-80
Stockdale Paradox and, 83-87, 88
budgeting, 140, 143
Buffett, Warren, 42, 97
Builtto Last(Collins and Porras), 14,
188
Built-to-Laststudy:
clockbuilding idea in, 197
core ideologyidea in, 198
genius ofAND idea in, 198
level5 leaders'relationshipto ideasof,
198
preservethe core/stimulateprogress
idea in, 198
research methods of, 188-89
role of,in Good-to-Greatstudy,
189-90
bureaucracy,disciplineand, 121, 142
Burgelman,Robert, 213
Burger,Ralph, 67-68
Burroughs,8, 130, J30, 234, 250, 260
unsustainedperformance of, 256-57
BusinessWeek, 28, 70, 130, 131, 132,
167,178, 236Cain, George, 28, 30-31,99
see also Abbott Laboratories
Camel, 58
Cederberg, Scott, 159
CEOs:
good-to-greatanalysisof, 243-44
see also executives
change, 11
acting on needfor, 56-58, 63
induced by technology, 147-48, 155
character traits, 51-52, 64
charismatic leadership, 72-73, 89, 216
Charles Schwab, 254
Charlotte News and Observer,214
Chirikos, Anthony, 30
Chrysler, 8, 82, 153,234,250,260
lacocca's tenure at, 29-30, 31, 131-33
unsustained performance of, 257
Churchill, Winston, 65, 73, 86, 154
Statistical Office of, 73
Circuit City, 8, 33, 57,126, 172, 227,
256
in acquisitions analysis,259
"best in the world"understanding of,
101
CEO analysisof, 249
comparison candidates for, 230
economic denominator question and,
106
executive interviews at, 239
Forbes profileof, 166
good-to-greatperformanceof, 7, 74
industryperformance and, 252
investment in, J67
in media, 166
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
170
Packard'sLawapplied by, 55-56
technology accelerator of, 150
see also Wurtzel, Alan
Cisco Systems, 216
Citicorp, 97, 188
Index 289
clock building idea, 197, 198-200
Coca-Cola, 4, 6, 18, 91, 107, 134, 149,
150,166,227
coherence, principle of, 182
Columbia Pictures, 189
compensation:
executive, 10, 49-50, 64, 244-46
good-to-greatanalysisof, 244-46
nonexecutive, 50
Nucor's systemof, 50-51
CompuServe, 158
Computerworld,182
Congress,U.S., 25
Coniston Partners, 23
Cooley, Dick, 42, 45, 171
Cooper, Jenni, 94
Cooper, Sidney, 55-56, 256
core competence, 99-100, 118-19
core ideology,193-96,196, 197, 198-200
of Disney, 195-96
of Hewlett-Packard, 193-94
of Merck, 194
Corky's, 32
Corporate Products Committee, 116
Council mechanism, 114-16, 200, 217
characteristics of, 115-16
CPC, 227
Crisisin Bethlehem(Strohmeyer), 138
Crocker Bank, 52-53, 254
Cullman, Joseph F., Ill, 28, 37, 58, 62,
77-78
self-assessment of, 34
Weissman decision of, 58-59
seealso Philip Morris
culture of discipline,seediscipline
CuttingEdge (McKibben),37
Cyclops,256
Daimler-Benz, 30, 257
Darwin, Charles, 91
DEC, 181290 Index
DeHavilland, 158
Dell, 158
DevelopmentofAmericanIndustries,236
discipline, 120-43, 161, 207, 217
Abbott's culture of, 122-24
and adheringto HedgehogConcept,
133-39, 142
budgetingand, 140, 143
bureaucracy and, 121, 142
clock building idea and, 200
core ideologyidea and, 200
freedomand responsibilitywithin,
123,124-26,142
genius ofAND idea and, 200
HedgehogConcept and, 123-24, 126
Level 5 Leadershipand, 130
matrix of, 122
Nucor's culture of, 136-39
Pitney Bowes'sculture of, 133-34
preservethe core/stimulateprogress
idea and, 200
ResponsibilityAccountingand, 123
"rinsingyour cottagecheese"factor
and,127-29, 142
start-upsand, 120-21
"stopdoing"listand, 124,139-41,
143
within Three Circles, 123-24
tyrannical, 129-33, 142
Wells Fargo'sculture of, 128-29
Dively,George, 181-82
Dixons, 256
Doom Loop, 14, 178-84
in direct comparisons,254-56
at Harris, 181-82
and leaderswho stop theflywheel,
181-82
and misguideduse of acquisitions,
180-81
signs of being in, 183-84
at Warner-Lambert, 178-80, 256
Drucker, Peter, 180
drugstore.com,144-47
Duffy, Duane, 86
Dunlap, Al, 28-29, 31,256
Eckerd, Jack:
"Cork"Walgreencomparedwith,
46-47
Eckerd Corporation, 4,8,46, 92, 93-94,
95,250,259
Doom Loop behaviorof, 255
economic engine question, 95-96, 96,
104-8,118,119
Economist, 236
Einstein, Albert, 91, 112-14
as Time's "Person of the 20th
Century," 154
ElectricKool-AidAcidTest, The (Wolfe),
41
Eli Lilly, 178
Ericson, Jim, 155
Ernst, Joanne, 116-17
Everingham,Lyle,28, 68, 170, 209
see also Kroger
Excel, 158
Executive Council, 116
executive interviews, 239-41
executives, 41-64
assignedto bestopportunities, 58-60,
63
charactertraitsaskeyto hiringof,
51-52,64
compensation of, 10, 49-51, 64,
244-46
"firstwho"principle and, 42-45, 50,
62,63
"genius with a thousand helpers"
model and, 45-48, 63
layoffsof, 53-54
need forchange of, 56-58, 63
Packard's Law and, 54-5 5
personal cost to, 60-61post-retirementrole of, 61-62
rigorneeded in decisionson, 44-45,
52-60, 63
turnover pattern of, 57
"weakgenerals,stronglieutenants"
model for, 43
facingreality,see brutal facts
faith, 80-85
Fannie Mae, 6, 8, 227
in acquisitionsanalysis,259
"best in the world"understandingof,
101
CEO analysisof, 249
comparison candidates for, 230
economic denominator question and,
106
executive interviews at, 239
good-to-greatperformance of, 7
Great Western compared with,
111-12,113
industryperformance and, 252
investment in, 172-73
Maxwell's tenure at, 25-26,45, 82-83
motivation at, 110
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
170
technologyacceleratorof, 150, 152
"firstwho" principle, 152, 207
clock building idea and, 199
core ideologyidea and, 199
for executives, 42-45, 50, 62, 63
genius ofAND idea and, 199
at Hewlett-Packard, 191-92
preservethe core/stimulate progress
idea and, 199
and shortageof qualitypeople,
216-17
Flywheel, 14, 164-78
alignment question and, 176, 177-78,
187
Index 291
buildup and breakthrough model of,
165-71
clockbuilding idea and, 201
coherence principle and, 182
core ideologyidea and, 201
"flywheeleffect"and, 174-78
geniusofAND idea and, 201
leaders who stop, 181-82
perception of, 165-69, 186
preservethe core/stimulateprogress
idea and, 201
short-termpressuresand, 172-74, 187
signs of being on, 183-84
as wraparoundidea, 182
Forbes, 24, 58, 94, 236
A&P as described by, 67
Chrysler's failed Maserati venture in,
132
Circuit City profiled in, 166
on dotcom phenomenon, 145, 146
on Kimberly-Clark'ssuccess, 169
Mockler in, 24-25
Singletonin, 48
Ford Motor Company, 43, 195
Fortune,26, 70, 131, 167, 220-21, 222,
236
Fortune 500rankings,6, 28, 35, 47, 136,
211,212,219,220
Fortune 1000 list, 177
"4-S" model, 101
Frankl, Viktor E., 86, 120
freedom, responsibilityand, 123,
124-26, 142
Freud, Sigmund, 91
Gandhi, Mohandas K., 154
Gates, Richard, 131
Gault, Stanley, 26-27, 31, 130-31
General Electric, 3,4, 6, 18, 33, 91, 158,
166,188,215
HedgehogConcept of, 215-16292 Index
General Mills, 227
General Motors, 65
genius ofAND, 198-200
"genius with a thousand helpers"model,
45-48
G.I. Joe (doll), 108, 257
Gillette, 8, 57, 61, 83, 141,152,172,178
in acquisitionsanalysis,259
attempted takeoverof, 23-24
"bestin the world" understandingof,
102
CEO analysisof, 249
comparison candidates for, 230
difficulttimesat, 213,214
economic denominator question and,
106
executive interviews at, 239
good-to-greatperformanceof, 7
HedgehogConcept and, 109-10
industry performance and, 252
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
170
technologyapplied by, 149-50
see also Mockler, Colman
Golden Key, 68
Goldman Sachs, 112
"good"performance, defined, 219
Good-to-Greatstudy:
acquisitionsanalysisin, 241-42,
259-60
black box question and, 9-11
Built-to-Laststudyconceptsand,
189-90,197-206
CEO analysisin, 243-44, 249-51
comparativeanalysesframeworksin,
247-48
corporate ownershipanalysisin, 246
criteria for selection in, 219-27
cut 1 election criteria for, 220-29
cut 2 election criteria for, 220, 221-22
cut 3 election criteria for, 220,
222-26
cut 4 election criteria for, 220, 227
difficult times and, 213-14
directcomparisonselectionprocess
in, 7-8, 228-33
executivechurn analysisin, 243
executive interviews in, 239-41
financialspreadsheetanalysisin, 238
frequentlyaskedquestionsabout,
211-18
industryanalysisrankingsin, 252-53
industryperformanceanalysisin,
242-43
insidevs. outsideCEO analysisin,
249-51
lackof high technologycompanies in,
213
media hypeanalysisin, 247
new economy and, 14-15
publiclytraded companiesin, 212
research steps in, 236-38
research teams assembled for, 5-6
role of board of directors and, 216
role oflayoffsanalysisin, 246
specialanalysisunits in, 241-47
statisticalsignificanceof, 211-12
summaryof concepts of, 11-14
technologyanalysisin, 247
unsustained companies in, 234-35
U.S. corporations in, 212, 221
Graniterock, 79-80
Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea
Company, seeA&P
Great Britain, 73
greatness,question of, 204-10
meaningfulwork and, 208
"great"performance,defined, 219
Great Western Financial, 250, 255, 259
Doom Loop behavior of, 255
Fannie Mae compared with, 111-12,
J13
Grundhofer, Jack, 43
Gulfstream, 132, 153Hagen, Eric, 129
Hagen, Ward, 179
Halcion, 78, 256
"Hanoi Hilton," 83
"hardiness" research studies, 82
Harris Corporation, 8, 153, 234,23S,
250, 260
in Doom Loop, 181-82
unsustained performance of, 257
Hartford, John, 67-68
Harvard Business Review, 236
Harvey,George, 134, 160
Hasbro, 8, 108, 234, 260
unsustained performance of, 257
Hassenfeld, Stephen, 108
"Hedgehog and the Fox,The" (Berlin),
90-91
HedgehogConcept, 13,90-119, 161,
184, 206
"best in the world"question and, 95,
96,97-103,118
clockbuilding idea and, 200
consistency in, 123-24, 126
core competence and, 99-100,
118-19
core ideologyidea and, 200
Council mechanism and, 114-16,
119
discipline and adherence to, 133-39,
142
diverseportfolioand, 215-16
economic engine question and,
95-96,96,104-8,118,119
of General Electric, 215-16
genius of AND idea and, 200
growth and, 112
as iterative process, 114-15, 114,
119
passion in, 96, 96, 108-10, 118
preservethe core/stimulateprogress
idea and, 200
simplicityin, 91-92, 94-95
Index 293
technologyand, 147-51, 153, 162
as Three Circles, see Three Circles
understandingvs. bravadoin, 110-17,
200, 202
Heinz, 227
Herring,Jim, 28, 68, 176
seealso Kroger
Hershey, 227
Hewlett, Bill, 191-94, 209
Hewlett-Packard, 6, 18, 54, 134, 166
core ideologyof, 193-94
evolution of, 191-93
Hinge ofFate, The (Churchill), 65
Hitler, Adolf, 73, 154
Hlavacek, Jim, 27
Hoover Institution, 84
HooversHandbookof Companies,236
Hornung, Lane, 80
Household Finance, 43
Howard Johnson, 189
"HP Way," 193
Huggies,20
Hughes, 109
Iacocca, Lee, 29-30, 31,131-33
Iacocca (Iacocca), 29
IBM, 70,134,158,181,254
Ym a Lucky Guy (Cullman), 34, 77
IndustryStandard, 145
In Love and War (Jim and Sybil
Stockdale), 84
Intel, 4, 6, 91, 166,213
Intercom network system, 147-48
International Committee for the Study
of Victimization, 82
InternationalDirectoryof Company
Histories, 236
International Harvester, 18
Internet, 134, 144-46, 148, 151, 158
InvestorsBusinessDaily, 29
Ironman (triathlon), 117, 127294 Index
Iverson, Ken, 34, 76,139, 167, 177,
209
on hierarchical inequality, 136
Hlavacek'sdescriptionof, 27-28
on role of technologyin success,
155-56
successor to, 213-14
see also Nucor
J. C. Penney, 46, 255
Jensen, PattyGriffin, 155
Johnson, Jim, 25, 152
Johnson & Johnson, 6, 134, 188
Jones, Chris, 159-60
Jones, Scott, 159
Jorndt, Dan, 32,145
Joss,Bob, 43
Judd, Stefanie, 189
Kellogg,227
Kelvie, Bill, 152
Kerkorian, Kirk, 30
Kesey, Ken, 41
Kimberly-Clark,28, 32, 59-60, 62, 81,
86,147,160,209,255
in acquisitionsanalysis,259
"best in the world"understandingof,
102
CEO analysisof, 249
comparisoncandidatesfor, 231
economic denominator question and,
106
executive interviews at, 239
Forbes on success of, 169
good-to-greatperformanceof,7
industryperformanceand, 252
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
170
in shiftto paper-basedproducts,
18-20,94-95,109,141,168-69
Smith's tenure at, 17-21,19, 59,
139-40; see also Smith, Darwin E.
technologyacceleratorof, 150
Kleenex, 20, 102
Knight,Linda, 110
Kodak, 70, 254
Kroger,8, 83, 86, 152, 172, 176,209
in acquisitionsanalysis,259
A&Pcompared with, 65-69, 66, 141
"bestin the world"understanding of,
102
brutal facts confronted by, 65-69, 70,
81-82
CEO analysisof, 249
comparisoncandidatesfor, 231
economic denominator question and,
107
executive interviews at, 239
good-to-greatperformance at, 7
industryperformance and, 252
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
170
rise of, 65-69, 66
scanning technologyused by, 148-49
superstoreconcept and, 68-69, 94
technologyacceleratorof, 150
seealso Everingham,Lyle;Herring,
Jim
Lanier Business Products, 182
LarryKing Live, 29
Larsen, Brian, 159
layoffs:
of executives, 53-54
in good-to-greatstudy,246
leadership,31, 237
as "answerto everything,"21-22
celebrity, 10, 12,29-30, 39-40
charismatic, 72-73, 89, 216
in conducting autopsieswithout
blame, 77-78, 88dialogue,debate and, 75-77, 88
informal meetings and, 75
with questions, 74-75, 88
in stopping theflywheel,181-82
seealso executives;Level 5 Leadership
Level 5 Leadership, 17-40, 161, 184
alignment question and, 177-78
ambition for company and, 21, 25-27,
36, 39, 60
and assignmentof credit and blame,
33-35, 39
board of directors and, 216
built-to-last ideas and, 198
clock building idea and, 198
core ideologyand, 198
cultivation of, 35-38
culture of discipline and, 13, 130
as driven, 30, 39
duality of, 22-23, 36, 39
ego and, 12-13, 21, 22, 26, 27-30, 36,
39
genius of AND idea and, 198
"geniuswith a thousandhelpers"
compared with, 47
hierarchy of,20
luck and, 33-34
modesty and, 27-30, 36, 39
personal humility and, 12-13
preservethe core/stimulateprogress
idea and, 198
prevalence of, 37
resolve and, 30-33, 36
technologyand, 13-14
at technologycompanies, 216
from within company, 31-32, 40
Li, Eve, 30
Lincoln, Abraham, 22-23, 25
Litton, 70
Long-RangeProfitImprovement
Committee, 116
Lotus 1-2-3, 158
Luftig,JeffreyT, 211-12
Index 295
MacDonald, Ray, 130
McDonald's, 126
McDonnell Douglas, 202
Mach3,23, 106
McKinsey& Company, 1
Majors, Lee, 83
managers, see executives
Mans Search for Meaning (Frankl),
120
Marine Corps, 51
Markham, Beryl, 1
Marlboro, 59, 108
Marriott, 189
Marx, Karl, 91
Maserati, 132, 153
Masters Forum, 154-55
Maxwell, David, 28, 62, 152, 172
Fannie Mae tenure of, 25-26,45,
82-83
Maxwell House, 108
Meehan, Bill, 1-3
Merck, George, 1
Merck,George, 2d, 194
Merck & Company, 6, 31, 91, 99, 134,
150,178,179
philosophyof, 194
Miller, 108
Miller,Arjay,43
Millhiser, Ross, 108-9
Mockler, Colman, 23, 28, 30, 31, 37, 38,
49,57,60,216
in Forbes, 24-25
quality of life of, 61
see also Gillette
Monopoly, 108
Montgomery Ward, 74
Moody'sCompanyInformationReports,
57, 243
Morgridge,John, 216
motivation, 11, 207
brutal facts and, 73-74, 75, 89
Motorola Company, 6, 134296 Index
NASDAQ, 4,173
Nassef, Dave, 51
Nations Business, 236
new economy, 14-15
Newell, 26, 131,257
Newman, Frank, 43
New Republic,236
Newsweek, 78
Newton, 158
NewYork StockExchange,166
New York Times, 236
Norton Corporation, 189
Nuclear Corporation ofAmerica,
76
Nucor, 8, 27, 33-34, 78, 83, 86,104,
167,172,177, 254
in acquisitionsanalysis,259
"best in the world"understandingof,
102
CEO analysisof, 249
class distinctions at, 138
climate ofdialogueand debateat,
75-76,77
comparison candidates for, 232
compensation systemof, 50-51
culture of disciplineat, 136-39
economic denominator questionand,
107
executive interviews at, 239
good-to-greatperformanceof,7
industryperformanceand, 252
managementturmoil at, 213-14
in media, 167
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
171
technologyacceleratorof, 151
technologyused by, 105,155-56,
163
Three Circles of, 137
see also Iverson, Ken
"number one, number two" concept,
69n
Oliver, Barney, 192
Osborne (computer), 158
Packard, David, 1, 54,191-94
Packard's Law, 54-55,192
Palm Computing, 158
Paragonmail processor,134
passion,in Hedgehog Concept, 96, 96,
108-10,118
Pepsico,6, 227
Perelman, Ronald, 23, 24
Peterson, R. J., 182
Pfizer, 31,150,179,256
Pharmacia, 31
Philip Morris,8, 34, 61-62,135, 255
in acquisitionsanalysis,259
"best in the world"understanding of,
102
CEO analysisof, 249
comparisoncandidatesfor, 232
decision-makingat, 60
economic denominator question and,
107
executive interviews at, 239
good-to-greatperformanceof, 7
industryperformanceand, 253
international markets decision of,
58-60, 135
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
171
passionforwork at, 108-9
perceptionof tobacco industryand,
109,215
Seven-Upacquired by, 77, 135
technologyacceleratorof, 151
seealso Cullman, Joseph F., Ill
Picasso, Pablo, 188
Pitney Bowes,8, 51, 83, 86, 104, 160,
172
in acquisitionsanalysis,259
Addressographvs., 70-72, 71"best in the world"understanding of,
103
CEO analysisof, 249
comparison candidates for, 232
culture of discipline at, 133-34
and economic denominator question,
107
executive interviews at, 239
good-to-greatperformance of, 7
industry performance and, 253
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
171
technologyacceleratorof, 151
see also Allen, Fred
Plain Talk(Iverson), 136
"Plastic People,"43
Plato, 90
Pohlman, Marvin, 137, 177
Porras,Jerry I., 188
Postal Service, U.S., 133
preservethe core/stimulateprogress,
198-200
Procter & Gamble, 6,17-18, 20, 59, 80,
86,134,147,169,188,255
Prodigy,158
Purdue, Fred, 72
Radiation, Inc., 181
Rathmann, George, 120-23
"red flag" mechanisms, 78-80, 88, 199
Reichardt, Carl, 28,42, 78, 97-98,128,
171
seealso WellsFargo
Remington Rand, 158
ResistingHostileTakeovers(Ricardo-
Campbell),216
responsibility,freedom and, 123,
124-26, 142
ResponsibilityAccounting, 123
Revlon, 23
Rexinger, Dan, 55
Index 297
Ricardo-Campbell, Rita, 216
rigor,principle of, 54-60, 63
"rinsingyour cottagecheese" factor,
127-29, 142
Rivas, Bill, 126
R. J.Reynolds,8, 58, 59, 109, 215, 250,
259
Doom Loop behavior of, 135, 157,
255
Rogaine, 173, 256
Rosenberg,Richard,43
Rubbermaid, 8,132, 153, 234, 250, 260
Gault's tenure at, 26-27, 130-31
tyrannical discipline at, 130-31
unsustained performance of, 257
Russell, Bertrand, 144
Salomon Brothers, 112
Sanders, Wayne, 81, 160
Sara Lee, 227
Scintillation Probe, 76
Scott, Dave, 127-28
Scott Paper, 8, 17-18, 20, 250, 259
Doom Loop behavior of, 255-56
Dunlap's tenure at, 28-29
Procter & Gamble's rivalrywith,
80-81, 86
Scribesof Delphi, 90
Sea-Land, 135,255
Security Pacific, 254
Semler, Bernard H., 123
Sensor, 23, 141, 149
Sensor for Women, 23
Seven-Up, 77, 135
short pay device, 79-80
Siegel,Sam, 76, 167
Silo, 8, 33,106, 250, 259
Doom Loop behavior of, 55-56, 256
Simantob, Sina, 205
Sinclair, Alyson, 189
Singleton, Henry,47-48, 258298 Index
Six Million Dollar Man, The, 83
Smith, Adam, 91
Smith, Darwin E, 17-21, 25, 28, 29, 30,
31,32,37,38,49,59,60,81,
168-69
"stopdoing"listsused by, 139-40
seealso Kimberly-Clark
SmithKline, 178
Sony, 158,188,195
Stalin, Joseph, 154
Standard& PoorsAnalystHandbook,
242-43, 252
Stanford University,Graduate School of
Business, 43
Starbucks, 92
start-up companies, 120-21
Stockdale, Jim, 83-87
Stockdale Paradox, 13, 83-87, 99, 116,
146, 184
see also brutal facts
stockoptions, 49
"stopdoing"list, 124,139-41,143
StrategicThinking Group, 116
Stravinsky,Igor, 164
Strohmeyer,John, 138
Tandy, 94, 255
technology,11,105,144-63,184, 237
as accelerator of momentum, 152-53,
162
change induced by, 147-48,155
clock building idea and, 201
core ideologyidea and, 201
demise of Bethlehem Steel and, 156-57
excessive reliance on, 158-59
and fear of being leftbehind, 159-61,
162
genius ofAND idea and, 201
good-to-greatanalysisof, 247
in good-to-greatcompanies, 155-57,
162,163
HedgehogConcept and, 147-51, 153,
162
Internet and, 144-46
Level 5 Leadershipand, 13-14
preservethe core/stimulateprogress
idea and, 201
as trap, 154-55
in Vietnam War, 158-59
Teledyne,8, 234, 250, 260
Singleton'stenure at, 47-48,48
unsustainedperformanceof, 258
Terry,Bill, 193
Three Circles, 94-97, 96, 118,161,
184
"bestat" question and, 95, 97-103
at Boeing,204
clockbuilding idea and, 200
core ideologyidea and, 200
disciplinewithin, 123-24
economic engine question and,
95-96, 104-8
failureto staywithin, 134-36, 142
genius ofAND idea and, 200
of Nucor, J37
passionand, 96, 108-10
preservethe core/stimulatedprogress
idea and, 200
see also HedgehogConcept
3M, 6,18,123,134,189
Time, 154
"title creep," 139
Toblerone, 108
Today, 29
Truman, Harry S., 17
Tullis, Richard, 181-82
UCLA Bruins, 171-72
UNIVAC, 158
Universityof Chicago Center for
Research in Security Prices
(CRSP),221,222Upjohn, 8, 31, 78,100, 141, 250, 259
Abbottcompared with, 98-99,
173-74,174
Doom Loop behavior of, 98-99,
256
U.S. Bancorp, 43
U.S. News, 236
U.S. Steel, 167
Van Genderen, Peter, 219
Velveeta, 108
Vietnam War, 83-84
reliance on technologyin, 158-59
VisiCalc, 158
Walgreen,Charles R., Ill, "Cork," 28,
32-33, 209
Eckerd compared with, 46-47
seealso Walgreens
Walgreens,6, 8, 32-33, 46-47, 92, 141,
152,161,209
in acquisitions analysis,259
"best in the world"understandingof,
103
CEO analysisof, 249
comparison candidates for, 233
economic denominator question and,
107
executive interviews at, 239
good-to-greatperformanceof,7
Hedgehogstrategyof,92-94
industry performance and, 253
Intercom system of, 147-48
Internet threat to, 145-46
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
171
technologyaccelerator of, 151
transformation of, 3-5, 104-5
seealso Walgreen,Charles R., Ill,
"Cork"
Index 299
Wall Street Journal, 18, 29, 110, 131-32,
236
Wall StreetTranscript,111
Wal-Mart, 6, 147, 166, 195
evolution of, 190-91,192
Walt DisneyCompany, 6, 134, 189
core ideologyof, 195-96
Walton, Sam, 190-91
Wang, 181
Wards, 74
Warner-Lambert, 8, 250, 259
Doom Loop behavior of, 178-80, 256
WashingtonMutual, 255
"weakgenerals,stronglieutenants"
model, 43
Weissman,George, 58-59, 61-62, 108
Weissman, Paul, 189
Welch, Jack, 33
Wells Fargo,8, 15,45, 72, 78, 83, 104,
105,172,227
in acquisitionsanalysis,260
Bank of America vs., 43-44, 44,
53-54, 86,128-29
"bestin the world" understandingof,
103
CEO analysisof, 249
comparison candidates for, 233
Crocker Bankacquisition and, 52-54,
254
culture of discipline at, 128-29
economic denominator question and,
107
executivehiring and transformation
of, 42-44
executive interviews at, 239
good-to-greatperformance of, 7
Hedgehogconcept of,97-98
industryperformance and, 253
"no miracle moment" in transition at,
171
technologyaccelerator of, 151
see also Reichardt, Carl300 Index
Westinghouse,158
WestpacBanking,43
Westwith the Night(Markham), 1
White, Blair, 81
Wilbanks,Leigh,94
Williams, Joe, 179
Wolfe, Tom, 41
Wooden, John, 171-72
Woolpert,Bruce, 79-80
World War II, 73, 154
Wurtzel,Alan,28,33,38,166
Cooper compared with,
55-56
on hiring the right people, 57
as leader with questions,
74-75
seealso Circuit City
Xerox, 70, 134,254
Young,Amber, 159
Zeien, Alfred M, 109(continued from front flap)
THE FINDINGS
The findings of the Good to Great study will surprise
many readers and shed light on virtually every area
of management strategy and practice. The findings
include:
• Level 5 Leaders: The research team was
shocked to discover the type of leadership
reguired to achieve greatness.
• The Hedgehog Concept (Simplicity within
the Three Circles): To go from good to great
requires transcending the curse of compe
tence.
• A Culture of Discipline: When you combine a
culture of discipline with an ethic of entrepre-
neurship, you get the magical alchemy of great
results.
• Technology Accelerators: Good-to-great com
panies think differently about the role of tech
nology.
• The Flywheel and the Doom Loop: Those who
launch radical change programs and wrenching
restructurings will almost certainly fail to make
the leap.
"Some of the key concepts discerned in the
study," comments Jim Collins, "fly in the face of our
modern business culture and will, quite frankly, upset
some people."
Perhaps, but who can afford to ignore these findings?
Jim Collins is coauthor of
Built to Last, a national bestseller for
over five years with a million copies
in print. A student of enduring great
companies, he serves as a teacher to
leaders throughout the corporate
and social sectors. Formerly a faculty member at the
Stanford University Graduate School of Business, where
he received the Distinguished Teaching Award, Jim now
works from his management research laboratory in
Boulder, Colorado.
Jacket design by Chin-Yee Lai
Author photograph by Anne Knudsen
Don't miss the next book by your favorite author. Sign up now
for AuthorTracker by visiting www.AuthorTracker.com
C Collins
An Imprintof HarperCollinsPubl/'shers
www.harpercollins.comPraise for OOD TO GREAT
"This carefully researched and well-written book disproves mc
current management hype—from the cult of the superhuman CEO to the
cult of IT to the acquisitions and merger mania. It will not enable medi
ocrity to become competence. But it should enable competence to
become excellence." Wr
—Peter F. Drucker ^*
kbook CEOs can't wait to buy." B^
—USA Today
"Collins and his research team have been tackling one of the biggest
questions business has to offer."
—Fortune
"With both Good to Great and Built to Last, Mr. Collins delivers two se
ductive messages: that great management is attainable by mere mortals
and that its practitioners can build gre.at institutions. It's just what us
mortals want to hear."
— Wall Street Journal
"The difference is how hard Mr. Collins works to arrive at his simple con
clusions. They are based on years of detailed, empirical research and are
all the more powerful for producing such unexpected results."
—Financial Times
"The Business Idea of the Year."
—Fast Company
"Collins agai
I. 4.1 .4 u. .:i4. *.-
I II llll II mi I
XO00BC4YG7Good to Great: Why SomeCom.
UsedVeryGood