MODERN MAN 
IN SEARCH OF A SOUL 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comMODERN MAN 
IN SEARCH OF 
A SOUL 
BY 
C. G. JUNG 
''l'S'YCJIOLOGJCAL 'tYJ>Bs'', ''TBB l'SYCROLOGY OJ' THIE UJl'COHSC'IOUS'' 
''CONTJIIBUTIOJl'5 ro ANALYTICAL l"SYCROLOGY'', arc 
i! 
LONDON 
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER e- CO LTD, 
BROADWAY HOUSE, 68-74 CARTER LANE, EC 
1933 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTramlt,ted by 
W. S. DELL 
AND 
CARY F. BAYNES 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comCONTENTS 
I. DREAM ANALYSIS IN ITS PRACTICAL APPLICATION 
II. PROBLBHS OF MODERN PsYCBOTBERAPY 32 
Ill. AIMS OF PsYCBOTHERAPY 63 
IV. A PsYcHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 85 
V. Tim STAGES OF Lura 109 
VI. FREUD AND JUNG-CONTRASTS l:J:2 
VII. ARCHAIC MAN 143 
VIII. PsYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 175 
IX. THE BASIC POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL 
PSYCHOLOGY 200 
X. THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 226 
XJ PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 255 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTRANSLATORS' PREFACE 
WnBIN the last decade there have been many references 
from varied sources to the fact that the western world 
stands on the verge of a spiritual rebirth, that is, a funda. 
mental change of attitude toward the values of life After 
a long period of outward expansion, we are beginning to 
look within ourselves once more. There is very general 
agreement as to the phenomena surmundmg this increasing 
shift of interest from facts as such to their meaning and value 
to us as individuals, but as soon as we begin to analyse the 
anticipations nursed by the various groups in our world 
with respect to the change that is to be hoped for, agreement 
is at an end and a sharp confhct of forces makes itself felt. 
By those who uphold revealed rebgion, the rebirth that 
seems imminent is thought of as a renaissance of Catholicism 
or Protestantism, as the case may be. They see mankind 
streammg by the million back to the bosom of the Church, 
there to be comforted for the disill.US1onm.ents and disasters 
of our post-war world, there to be taught the paths that 
will lead out of chaos. Reoewal of faith in Christianity, 
they say, will bring us back to a sure way of life and restore 
the inspiration the world has lost 
Another great group of people think that the new attitude 
is to be attained by the total destruction of religion as it 
has up to now been understood. Rehgion is, they say, 
a relic of supentitiOU8 barbansm, and in its place must come 
vh 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comviii TRANSLATORS' PREFACE 
a new and lasting period of " enlightenment ". Let man 
but apply lrls knowledge in tbe right way, especially lrls 
knowledge of economics and technology, and all tbe great 
bogies of poverty, ignorance, greed, etc., will vanish into 
tbin air and man will be restored to lrls lost paradise. To 
tbem the rebirth is to be in tbe realm of reason alone, and 
the intellect becomes the arbiter of man's fate. 
Between tbese two extremes of traditional faitb and 
militant rationahsm, every conceivable shade of opinion 
about tbis great problem of humanity's next step in psyohic 
evolution is to be found. It may be said that the middle 
pomtion is held by those people who know tbat tbey have 
outgrown tbe Church as exemphfied in Christianity, but 
who have not therefore been brought to deny the fact that 
a religious attitude to hfe is as essential to them as a behef 
in the authenticity of science These people ha.ve experienced 
the soul as vividly as tbe body, tbe body as vividly as 
the soul. And the soul has manifested itself to tbem in 
ways not to be explained in terms eitber of traditional 
tbeology or of materiahsm. They do not wish to sever the 
real piety tbey feel within tbemselves from tbe body of 
scientific fact to which reason gives its sanction. They are 
convinced tbat if tbey can attain to more knowledge of the 
inner workings of theu own minds, more informatwn about 
tbe subtle but none the less perfectly delinite laws that 
govern tbe psyche, tbey can aclueve tbe new attitude tbat is 
demanded without having on the one hand to regress to what 
is but a tbinly veiled medizval tbeology, or on tbe otber, to 
fall victims to the illusions of nineteenth-century ideology. 
It is to tbis last group of people tbat Jnng speaks in 
convincing tenns He does not evade the difficult task of 
syntbesizing lDs knowledge of tbe soul, gamed in lDs many 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTRANSLATORS' PREFACE ix 
yeal'S of practice as psycluatnst and analyst, into a fund of 
information available and applicable to everyone. He gives 
those clues to the nature and functioning of the psyche for 
wluch the modem man is pmnfully groping. The point 
of view he lays before us is a challenge to the spuit, and 
evokes an active response in everyone who has felt within 
himself an mge to grow beyond his inheritance. 
With one exception. 1 all the essays which make up this 
volume have been delivered as lectures. The Gennan texts 
of four of them have been brought out in separate publica­
tions • and the others are to be found m a volume• together 
with several other essays which have already appeared in 
Enghsh. 
We are indebted to Mrs. Violet de Laszlo for many helpful 
suggestions 1D regard to the essay, Psychotlurapssls o, the 
Clergy. Both Dr. Jung and Mrs Jung have been kind 
enough to read and cnbcize the translatrons in part 
CARY F. BAYNES. 
Zulll<:II, MM'UI 1933 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comMODERN MAN 
IN SEARCH OF A SOUL 
DREAM-ANALYSIS IN ITS PRACTICAL 
APPLICATION 
THP. use of drea.m-.analys1s in psychotherapy is still a 
much-debated question Many practitioners .find 1t mdts­
pensable 1n the treatment of neuroses, and ascnbe as much 
importance to the psycluc activity manifested m dreams 
as to consctousness 1tse1f Others, on the contrary, dispute 
the value of dream-analysis, and regard dreams as a negbgible 
by-product of the psyche 
Obvmusly. d a person holds the view that the uncon.scJ.ous 
plays a lea.dmg rOle 111 the fonnabon of neuroses, he will 
attnbute practical s1gru:ficance to dreams as direct ex­
pressJ.ons of the unconscious. If, on the other hand, he 
demes the unconscious or thmks that 1t has no part in the 
development of neuroses, he will nnnumze the :unportance 
of dream-analysis. It is regrettable that m this year of 
grace 1931, more than half a century since Carus formulated 
the concept of the unconscious, over a century Since Kant 
spoke of the " llllDleasura.ble . . . field of obscure ideas ", 
and nearly two hundred years since Leibniz postulated an 
• 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 
unconscious psychic activity, not to mention the achieve­
ments of Janet, Flournoy and Freud-that after all this, 
the actuality of the unconscious should still be a matter 
for controversy. Since it 1S my intention to deal exclusively 
with questions of practical treatment, I will not attempt in 
this place a deleoce of the hypothesis of the unconscious, 
though it is obvious enough that dream-analysis stands or 
falls with this hypothesis. Without it the dream appears 
to be merely a freak of nature, a meaningless conglomerate 
of memory-fr'l!meots left over from the happenings of the 
day. Were the dream nothmg more than this, there would 
be no excuse for the present discussion We must recogmze 
the unCODSC10us if we are to treat of dream-analysis at all, 
for we do not resort to it as a mere exercise of the wits, but 
as a method for uncovering hitherto unconscious psyclnc 
contents which are causally related to the neurosis and 
therefore of importance in its treatment. Anyone who 
deems tlus hypothesis unacceptable must simply rule out 
the question of the practicability of dream-analysis. 
But since, according to our hypothesis, the unconscious 
plays a causal part in the neurosis, and smce dreams are 
the direct expresmon of UDCOilSClous psychic activity, the 
attempt to analyse and mterpret dreams 1S entirely Justified. 
from a scientmc standpoint. Quite apart from therapeutic 
results, we may expect this line of endeavour to give us 
scientific insight mto psychic causality. For the praci:ttioner, 
however, scientific discoveries can at most be a gratifying 
by-product of his efforts in the field of therapy. He will 
nut feel called upon to apply dream-analysis to his patients 
on the chance that it may throw light upon the problem 
of psychic causality. He may believe, of course, that the 
inlicht so gained IS of therapeutic val11&-in wluch case 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 
he will regaxd dream-analysis as one of his professional 
duties. It is well known that the Freudian school is of 
the opinion that important therapeutic effects are achieved 
by throwing hght upon the unconscious causal fa.ctom-­
that IS, by explairung them to the patient and thus making 
bun conscious of the soun:es of 1us trouble. 
If we assume. for the time bemg, that this expectation 
is borne out by the facts, we can restrict omselves to the 
questions whether or not dream•analysis enables us to 
discover the unconscious causes of the neurosis, and whether 
it can do tins utl8lded, or must be used in conjunction with 
other methods. The Freudian answer, I ma.y assume, is 
common knowledge. My own experience confirms this view 
inasmuch as I have found that dreams not mfrequently bring 
to light 1n an unmistakable way the uncODSCious contents 
that are causal factors in a neurosis Most often it is the 
in1bal dreams that do this---1 mean, those dreams that a 
patient reports at the very outset of a treatment. An 
illustration will perhaps be helpful. 
I was consulted by a man who held a prominent position 
in the world. He was afflicted with a sense of anxiety and 
insecurity, and complamed of chzziness sometimes resultmg 
in nausea, of a heavy head and drlnculty in breathing-this 
bemg an exact descnpbon of the symptoms of mountain­
SJ.Ckness. He had had an unusually successful career, and 
had risen, with the help of amb1bon, industry and nahve 
talent, from a humble origin as the son of a poor peasant. 
Step by step he had climbed, attaining at last an important 
poat that offered him every opportunity for further social 
advancement. He had actually reached a place in life 
from wluch he could have begun lus ascent into the upper 
regions, when suddenly his neUJ'OSlS mtenrened. At this 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com4 DREAM-ANALYSIS 
point of his story the patient could not refrain from that 
stereotyped e,rclamation which begins with the familiar 
words. "And just now, when I ... " The fa.et that he 
had all the symptoms of mountain-sickness was highly 
appropriate to the peculiar situation in which he found 
himself He had brought with hDn to the consultation -
dreams of the pteeeding night. 
The :first dream was as follows · " I am once more in 
the small village where I was born. Some peasant boys 
who went to school with me are stand.mg together in the 
street. I walk past them, pretendmg not to lmow them I 
hear one of them. who is pointing at me, say: 'He doesn't 
often come back to our village.' " No tncks of interpretation 
are needed to recognize and to understand the allUS1on to 
the humble beginmngs of the dreamer's career. The dream 
says quite clearly . " You forget how far down you 
began." 
Here is the second dream " I am in a great hurry 
because I am gomg on a Journey. I hunt up my bdgg'age, 
but cannot find 1t. Time flies, and the tram 'Ylll1. soon be 
leaving. Finally I succeed in getting all my things together 
I hurry along the street, discover that I have forgotten 
a bnef-case contaunng lltlportant papers, dash breathlessly 
back again, find it at last, and then run towards the stahon, 
but make hardly any headway. With a final effort I rush 
on to the platform only to find the tram steaming out into 
the yards. It is very long, and runs in a curious S-sha.ped 
curve It occurs to me that if the driver is not careful, and 
puts on full steam when he comes to the straight stretch, 
the rear coaches w1U still be on the curve and will be thrown 
over by the speed of the train. As a ma.tter of fact the 
driver opens the throttle as I try to shout. The rear coaches 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 
rock frightfully, and are actually thrown off the rails. There 
is a tern.hie catastrophe. I awake in terror." 
Here, too, we can understand without much diffi.culty 
the situation represented. by the dream. It pictares the 
patient's frantic haste to advance himself still further 
Since the driver at the front of the train goes thoughtlessly 
ahead, the coaches behind him rock and finally overturn­
that is, a neurosis is developed. It 1S clear that, at this 
period of hie, the panent had reached the highest point 
of his career-that the effort of the long ascent from his 
lowly origin had exhausted his strength. He should have 
contented himself with his aclrlevements, but instead he 
is dnven by his ambition to attempt to scale heights of 
success for wluch he 1S not fitted The neuroSIS came upon 
him as a warning. Circumstances prevented my treatmg 
the patient, and my view of lus case did not satisfy bun 
The upshot was that events ran their course in the way 
indicated by the dream. He tried to exploit the professwnal 
openings that tempted lus ambition and mu so violently 
off the track that the tram-wreck was reahzed m actual 
hfe The patient's anamnesis permitted the inference that 
the m.ountazn-su:kness pomted to lus mablllty to climb any 
further. The inference 1s confirmed by lus dreams which 
present tlus mabihty as a fact 
We here come upon a charactenshc of dreams that must 
take first place in any discus,ion of the apphcability of 
dream-analysis to the treatment of neuroses The dream gives 
a in1e picture of the subjective state, while the conscious 
mind denies that this st.ate exists, or recognizes it only 
grudgingly. The patient's conscious ego could see no 
reason why he should not go steadtly forward ; he continued 
his struggle for advancement, refusing to admit the fact 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com6 DREAM-ANALYSIS 
which subsequent events made all too plain-that he was 
actually at the end of his tether When, m such cases, we 
listen to the dictates of the COllS('lOUS mmd, we are always 
in doubt. We can draw opposite concIUS1ons from the 
patient's anamnesis After all, the pnvate soldJ.er may 
cany a marshal's baton m his knapsack, and many a. son 
of poor parents has achieved the highest success. Why 
should it not be so in my patient's cao;e ;, Smee my Judge­
ment is fallible, why should my own con1ecture J>e more 
dependable than his l At tills point the dream comes m 
as the expression of an mvoluntary psycluc process not 
controlled. by the conscious outlook It presents the 
subjective state as 1t really is It has no respect for my 
conjectures or for the patient's views as to how things should 
be, but simply tells how the matter stands. I have therefore 
made 1t a rule to put dreams on a plane with physiological 
fact If sugar appears in the unne, then the unne contains 
sugar, and not albumen or urobtlm or somethmg else that 
I may have been led to expect. Tins is to say that I take 
dreams as facts that are invaluable for cbagnosis 
It is the way of dreams to give us more than we ask, 
and this is true of those I have just cited as illustrations 
They not only allowed us an mSJght into the causes of the 
neurosis, but afforded a prognosis as well. What is more, 
they showed us at what point the treatment should begm 
The patient must be preveoted from going full steam ahead 
This is precisely what he tells himself m the dream. 
For the time being we will content ourselves with this 
hint, and return to the question whether dreams enable 
us to explam the causes of a neurosis. I have cited two 
dreams that actually do this. But I could equally well 
cite any number of initial dreams which do nothing of the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 7 
kind, although they are perfectly transparent. I do not 
wish for the present to consider dreams which call for 
sean:lnng analysis and interpretation. 
The point is that there are neuroses whose actual origins 
we discover only at the very eod of an analysis, and there 
are also cases m which it IS of. no benefit to have discovered 
the ongm of the neurosis. Thts brings me back to the 
Freudian view, mentioned above, that for the purposes of 
therapy ,it is necessary for the patient to become COilSCJ.OUS 
of the causal facton m his disturbance-a view that 19 httle 
more than a survival of the old theory of the trauma. I do 
not, of course, deny that many neuroses have a traumatic 
origin , I simply contest the notion that all neuroses are 
of tins nature and arise without exception from some 
crucial expenence of childhood. Tlus view of the question 
results m a causahs!K: approach. The doctor must give 
his whole attention to the patient's past ; he must always 
ask . " Why ;i " and neglect the equally pertinent question : 
" What for > " This is frequently very harmful to the 
patient, for he is forced to search in his memory-perhaps 
over a course of years-for a hypotheb.cal event in lus 
chtldhood, whtle tlnngs of munediate importance are grossly 
neglected A purely causa.hstic approach is too narrow to 
do JUStic-e to the true significance, either of the dream, or of 
the neurosis A person is biassed who turns to dreamc; for the 
sole purpose of discovering the lndden cause of the neurosis, 
for he leaves as,de the larger part of the dream's actual 
contn"bution. The dreams I have cited unmistakably 
present the ztiological factors in the neurosis , but it is 
clear that they alao offer a prognosis or anticipation of the 
future and a suggestion as to the course of treatment as 
well. We must furthennore bear in mind that a great 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 
many dreams do not touch upon the causes of the neurosis, 
but treat of quite different matters-among others, of the 
patient's attitude to the doctor. I should hke to illustrate 
this by recountmg three dreams of the same patient. She 
consulted three different analysts in turn, and at the 
begimung of each treatment she had one of these dreams. 
Here is the :first : " I must cross the frontier into the 
next country, but no one can tell me where the boundary 
lies, and I cannot find 1t." The treatment which followed 
this dream was unsuccessful, and was soon broken off 
The second dream is as follows · " I must cross the 
frontier It ts a black night, and I cannot find the custom­
house. After a long search I notice a small light far away 
and suppose that the fronb.er he,r; over there But m order 
to reach 1t, I must cross a valley and pass through a dark 
wood, m wluch I lose my sense of direction Then I notice 
that someone IS with me. Tins person suddenly clings to 
me like a madman and I awake m terror." That treatment 
also was discontinued after a few weeks, the reason bemg 
that the patient was completely disoriented by the analyst's 
unconscious identification with her. 
The tlurd dream took place when the patient came mto 
my hands. It runs · " I must cross a frontier, or rather, I 
have already crossed it, and find myseH in a SWISS custom­
house. I have only a handbag with me, and believe that 
I have nothing to declare But the customs oflictal dives 
mto my bag and, to my astonishment, pulls out two full­
sized mattresses " The patient mamed during the course of 
her treatment with me, but not without a violent resistance 
to this step. The cause of her neurone resistance came to 
light only after many months, and there is not a hmt of 1t 
anywhere in these dreams They are without exception 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 
anticipations of the difliculties she is to have with the 
analysts to whom she has come for treatment. 
I could ate many other dreams to the same effect, but 
these may suffice to show that dreams can be anticipatory 
and, m that case, must lose their pa.rtu:ular meaning if 
they are treated in a purely causahstic way These three 
dreams give clear Information about the analytical situation, 
and it IS extremely important for the purposes of therapy 
that this be rightly understood. The first doctor uuderstood 
the situation and sent the pa.bent to the second. Here she 
drew her own conclUS10ns from her dream, and deeded to 
leave My mterpretat10n of her third dream dlsa.ppomted 
her greatly, but she was chstinctly encouraged to go on in 
spite of all difficulties by the fact that 1t reported. the frontier 
already crossed. 
Imtia.J. dreams are often ama.zmgly transparent and 
clear-cut But as the \\-otk of analysis progresses, the 
dreams m a httle while cease to be clear If they should 
prove excepbonal, and keep their clanty, we can be sure 
that the analysis has as yet not touched some 1ID.portant 
part of the personality. As a rule, the dreams become less 
transparent, and more blurred, shortly after the beginning 
of the treatment. It becomes increasingly difficult to 
interpret them, a further reason for thIS being that a point 
may soon be reached where the doctor is unable, if the truth 
be told, to understand the Situation as a whole This is how 
the matter really stands, for to say that the dreams are 
unmtelhgible is a mere reflection of the doctor's subjective 
opmion Nothing is unclear to the understand.mg , it is 
only when we fall to widerstand that things appear unintel­
ligible and confused. In themselves, dreams are clear­
that is, they are Just as they must be uuder the given 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 
conditions. If we look back at these " unintelligible " 
dreams from a later stage of the treatment or from a distance 
of some years, we are often astounded at our own blindness, 
It 18 a fact that, as an analysis progresses, we come upon 
dreams that are strikingly obscure in comparisoo with the 
initial dreams. But the doctor should not be too sure that 
these later dreams are really confused, or be too hasty in 
accusing the patient of dehberate resistance He would do 
better to take the fact as an indication of his own growing 
inability to understand the situation. The psychiatrist 
likewise is prone to call a patient " confused " when he 
would do well to recognize the pro1ection and admit his 
own confusion, for 1t is really his understand.mg that grows 
confused in face of the patient's strange behaviour. For 
the purposes of therapy, moreover, it is highly important 
for the analyst to adnut Ins lack of understanding from time 
to time, for nothing IS more unbearable for the pahent 
than to be always understood The latter in any case 
relies too much upon the mysterious mmght of the doctor, 
and, by appealing to 1us professional vanity, lays a dangerous 
trap for him. By taking refuge in the doctor's self-confidence 
aod " profound " understandmg, the patient loses all sense 
of rea.hty, falls into a stubborn transference, and retards 
the cure. 
Understandmg is clearly a sub1ect1ve process It may 
be very one-sided, m that the physician understands whtle 
the patient does not In such a case the doctor somet1.m.es 
feels it his duty to convmce the pat:J.ent, and if the latter 
will not allow himself to be convmced, the doctor accuses 
him of resistance. When the understandmg lS all on my 
side, I find it advisable to stress my lack of understanding. 
It is relatively unimportant whether the doctor understands 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS n 
or not, but everything hangs on the patient's doing so 
What is really needed is a mutual agreement which is the 
fruit of Joint refl.ecbon. It is one-sided, and therefore 
dangerous, understanding for the doctor to prejudge the 
dream from the standpoint of a certa.J.n doctrine and to 
make a pronouncement which may be theoretically sound, 
but does not wm the patient's assent. Jn so far aCJ the 
pronouncement fails m tlus respect, it is incorrect in the 
practical sense, and it may also be mcorrect in the sense that 
,t anticipates and thereby cripples the actual development 
of the patient. We appeal only to the patlent's bram if 
we try to mculcate a truth ; but if we help him to grow 
up to this troth in the course of ht,; own development, we 
have reached Ins heart, and this appeal goes deeper and 
acts with greater force 
When the doctor's interpretation is based merely upon 
a one-sided theory or a preconceived opmion, his chances 
of convincing the patient or of aclueving any therapeutic 
results depend chiefly upon suggestion And let no one 
deceive lumself as to the effects of suggestion. In itself 
suggest1011 is not to be despised, but 1t has senous ]1D11tations, 
and reacts upon the patient's mdependence of character 
m a very undesirable way. A pract1Slll8' analyst may be 
supposed to believe m the sigmfi.cance and value of the 
widening of conscwusness-1 mean by tins the procedure 
of bnngmg to light the parts of the personahty which were 
previously unCODSClOUS and sabjectmg them to conscious 
discrimination and cnhcism. It IS an undertaking which 
requires the patient to face his problems, and taxes his 
powers of conscious judgement and declSlon. It is nothing 
less than a challenge to the ethical sense, a call to arms that 
must be answered by the whole personality. Therefore, 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com.. DREAM-ANALYSIS 
with respect to personal development, the analytical approach 
is of a higher order than methods of treatment based upon 
suggestion. This is a kind of magre that works m the dark 
and makes no ethical demands upon the personality. 
Methods of treatment based upon suggestion are deceptive 
makeshifts , they are incompatible ~ith the principles of 
analytical therapy, and should be avoided. But suggestion 
can of course be avoided only when the doctor is aware of 
the many doors through which it can enter There remams 
in the best of circumstances enough-and more than 
enough-unconscious suggestion. 
The analyst who wishes to rule out conscious suggestion 
must consider any dream interpretation invalid that does 
not wm the assent of the patient, and he must search until 
he finds a formulation that does. This is a rule which, 
I believe, must always be observed, especially m dealing 
with those dreams whose obscunty is evidence of lack of 
understanding on the part of the doctor as well as of the 
patient. The doctor should regard every dream as a new 
departure--as a soucce of infonnat10n about unknown 
concb:bons concerning which he has as much to leam as 
the patient. It goes without saying that he should hold 
no preconceived opinions based upon a particular theory, 
but stand ready in every smgle case to construct a totally 
new theory of dreams. There is sWl a boundless opportunity 
for pioneer-work m this field. 
The view that dreams are merely imaginary fulfilments 
of suppressed wishes has long ago been superseded. It IS 
certamly true that there are dreams winch embody sup­
pressed wishes and fears, but what is there which the 
dream cannot on occasion embody ? Dreams may give 
expreSS1on to ineluctable truths, to philosophical pro-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS I3 
nouncements, illusions, wtld fantasies, memories, plans, 
anticipations, irrational experiences, even telepathic visions, 
and heaven knows what besides. One thing we ought 
never to forget : almost the half of our lives is passed m , 
a more or less unconscious state. The dream 1,; specifically 
the utterance of the unconscious We may call CODSClOUSDess 
the dayhght realm of the human psyche, and cootrast it 
with the nocturnal reaJm of unconscious psychic activtty 
which we apprehend as dreamlike fantasy. It is certain 
that consciousness consists not only of wishes and fears, 
but of vastly more than these, and it is lugbly probable that 
the unconscious psyche contains a wealth of contents and 
livmg forms equal to or even greater than does conscwus-­
ness, which 1s characterized by concentration, hmltation 
and excluSion 
This being the state of affairs, it is imperative that we 
should not pare down the meaning of a dream to fit some 
narrow doctrine. We must remember that there are not 
a few patients who umtate the technical or theoretical 
jargon of the doctor, and do this even in their dreams 
No language eXIsts that cannot be misused It is hard to 
reahze how badly we are fooled by the abuse of ideas , 1t 
even seems as 1f the unconscious had a way of stranglmg 
the physician m the coils of hIS own theoxy All tins bemg 
so, I leave theory aside as much as possible in analysing 
dreams. We cannot, of oomse, dispense with theory 
enbrely, for it is needed to make things intellig,ble. It is 
on the basis of theory, for mstance, that I expect dreams 
to have a meaning. I cannot prove m every case that 
dreams are meanmgfu.l, for there are dreams that neither 
doctor nor patient understands. But I must regard them 
as hypothetically meaninglul in order to find courage to 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comI4 DREAM-ANALYSIS 
deal with them at all. To say that dreams contribute in an 
important way to conscious knowledge, and that a dream 
which fails to do so is a dream which has not been properly 
interpreted-this, too, is a theoretical statement But I 
must adopt this hypothesis in order to make it clear to 
myseH why I analy,,e dreams On the other hand, every 
hypothesis about the nature of the dream, its function and 
structure, is merely a rule of thumb and must be subject 
to constant modrlicatwns. We must never forget in dream­
analysis, even for a moment, that we move on treacherous 
ground where notbmg is certain but uncertainty. A 
suitable warning to the dream-interpreter-if only it were 
not so parado:x1cal-would be : " Do anything you hke, 
only don't try to understand I " 
When l\--e take up an obscure dream, our first task is not 
to understand and mterpret it, but to estabhsh the context 
with minute care. What I have in mind is not a boundless 
sweep of " free associations " startmg from any and every 
image in the dream, but a careful and conscious illwnmation 
of those chains of associa.hon that are chrectly connected 
with particular images Many patients have first to be 
educated to this task, for they resemble the doctor in their 
urgent desire to understand and to mterpret offhand. Tlus 
is particularly the case when they have already been 
educated-or rather, miseducaU'd-by their reading or by a 
previous analysis that went wrong. They give assoc,ations 
m accordance with a theory ; that is, they try to understand 
and interpret, and thus they nearly always get stuck. Like 
the doctor, they wish at once to get behind the dream in 
the false belief that it is a mere f~ conceahog the truo 
meaning. Perhaps we may call the dream a ~. but 
we must remember that the fronts of most houses by no 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 
means trick or deceive us, but, on the contrary, follow the 
plan of the building and often betray its inner arrangement. 
The " manifest " dream-picture 1S the dream itseH, and 
contains the " latent " meaning If I find sugar in the 
urine, it is sugar, and not a~ that conceals albumen. 
When Freud speaks of the " dream-~• ", he IS really 
speaking, not of the dream itseH, but of its obscunty, and 
in so dDDlg is projecting upon the dream Ins own lack of 
understandmg. We say that the dream has a false front 
onJy because we fall to see into 1t. We would do better to 
say that we are deabng with something like a text that 
IS uninteJli«,ble, not because 1t has a la~e. but sunply 
because we cannot read it. We do not have to get behind 
such a text m the first place, but must learn to read it 
We shall best succeed 1n readmg dreams by estabhshing 
thel.f context, as already remarked. We shall not succeed 
with the help of free assoCJ.a:tions, any more than we could 
use that means to dectpher a Hittite mscriphon Free 
associations will help me to uncover all my own complexes, 
but for this purpose I need not start from the dream-I 
nught as well take a sentence in a newspaper or a " Keep 
out " sign. If we associate freely to a dream, our complexes 
will turn up nght euough, but we shall hardly ever discover 
the meaning of the dream. To do this, we must keep as 
close as possible to the dream-images themselves. When 
a pen,on has dreamed of a deal table, bttle is accomplished 
by his associating it with Ins wntmg-desk which is not 
made of deal. The dream refers expressly to a deal table. 
If at this point nothing occurs to the dreamer, his hesitation 
srgniftes that a particular darkness surrounds the dream­
image, and this is suspicious. We would expect bun to 
have dozens of associations to a deal table, and when he 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comI6 DREAM-ANALYSIS 
cannot find a single one, this must have a meaning. In 
such cases we should return agam and again to the image 
I say to my patients : " Suppose I had no idea what the 
words 'deal table' mean. Descnbe this ob1ect and give me 
1ts history in such a way that I cannot fail to understand 
what sort of thing it is." We succeed in this way in 
estabhshing a good part of the context of that particular 
dream-image. When we have done this for all the images 
in the dream, we are ready for the venture of interpretation 
Every mterpretation is hypothetical, for it is a mere 
attempt to read an unfamiliar text. An obscure dream, 
taken by 1tseH, can rarely be interpreted with any certainty, 
so that I attach little importance to the interpretation of 
single dreams. With a senes of dreams we can have more 
confidence in our mterpretations, for the later dreams 
correct the mistakes we have made m handling those that 
went before. We are also better able, ma dream senes, to 
recognize the important contents and basic themes, and 
I therefore urge my patients to make a careful record of 
their dreams and the interpretations given them. I also 
show them how to work up their dreams in the way I have 
just inchcated, so that they can bnng me in wnting the 
dream and the matenal that forms the context of the 
dream. In later stages of analysis I let them work out the 
mterpretations as well. The patient learns in this way how 
to consult the unconscious without the doctor's help. 
If dreams did nothing more than inform us about the 
causal factors in a neurosis, we could safely let the doctor 
haodle them alone. My way of dealing with them, more­
over, would be quite superfluous if all that we could expect 
of them were a collection of hints and insights helpfol to 
the doctor. But since it is probable, as I have shown in 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS •7 
a few examples, that dreams contain more than practical 
helps for the doctor, dream-analyms deserves very special 
corundera.tion. Somebmes, indeed. it is a matter of hfe 
and death. 
Among many cases of this sort, I have been especially 
impressed with one that concerned a colleague of mine 
in Zmich. He was a man somewhat older than myself 
whom I saw from t1D1.e to tune, and who always teased me 
on these occasions about my mterest m dream-Interpretation. 
I met lum one day m the street, and he called out to me : 
" How are thmgs going? Are you still mterpreting dreams ? 
By the way, I've had another 1d.iobc dream. Does 1t mean 
somethmg too ; " He had dreamed as follows : ., I am 
chmbmg a high mountain over steep, snow-covered slopes. 
I mount higher and higher-it is marvellous weather. The 
lngher I cbmb, the better I feel. I trunk: ' If ooly I could 
go on chmbing hke tins for ever I • When I reach the 
summit, my happiness and elabon are so strong that I 
feel I could mount nght up into space. And I discover 
that I actually can do this. I go on climbing on empty air. 
I awake in a real ecstasy." When he had told me his 
dream, I said: " My dear man, I know you can't give 
up mountameering, but let me implore you not to go al.one 
from now on. When you go, take two guides, and you 
must promise on your word of honour to follow their 
directions " " Incomgible I " he rephed laughing, and said 
good-bye I never saw him again. Two months later came 
the first blow. When out alone, he was buried by an 
avalanche, but was dug out in the nick of time by a military 
patrol which happened to come along. Three months after 
this the end came. He went on a climb accompamed by 
a younger friend, but without guides. An alpimst standing 
B 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comI8 DREAM-ANALYSIS 
below saw him hterally step out into the au as he was 
letting hunself down a rock wall. He fell on to the head 
of his friend, who was waiting beneath him, and both were 
dashed to pieces far below That was ecsta:ns in the full 
meaning of the word. 
No amount of scepticism and critical reserve has ever 
enabled me to regard dreams as negligible occurrences. 
Often enough they appeaz senseless, but it is obviously we 
who lack the sense and the mgenuity to read the enigmatical 
message from the noctumal reahn of the psyche. When 
we see that at least a half of man's hie is passed in tlus 
reahn, that CODSCiousness has its roots there, and that the 
unconscious operates in and out of waking existence, 1t 
would seem incumbent upon medical psychology to shaipen 
its perceptions by a systemahc study of dreams. No one 
doubts the importance of conscious e:x:penence ; why then 
should we question the unportance of unconstlOus hap­
penings 1 They also belong to human life, aod they are 
sometimes more truly a part of it for weal or woe than any 
events of the day. 
Dreams give information about the secrets of the inner life 
and reveal to the dreamer ludden factors of lns personality. 
As long as these are undiscovered, they d!sturb his wakmg 
hfe and betray themselves only in the form of symptoms 
This means that we cannot effectively treat the patient 
from the side of consciousness alooe, but must bnng about 
a change in aod through the UDCODSC10US As iaI as present 
knowledge goes, there is only ooe way of doing this : there 
must be a thorough-going, cooscious assimilation of 
unconscious contents. By " assimilation ", I mean a 
mutual intezpenetmtion of conscious aod uuconscious 
contents, aod not---<IS is too commonly thought-a 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS Iq 
one-sided valuation, interpretation and deformation of 
unconsctous contents by the conscious mmd As to the 
value and sigruficance of unconscious contents m general, 
very :nustaken views are abroad It is well known that the 
Freud.Ian school presents the unconscious in a thoroughly 
deprec1atory hght, Just as also 1t looks on prumt1ve man 
as httle better than a wtld beast Its nursery-tales about 
the terrible old man of the tnbe and 1ts teaclungs about 
the "mfanttlc-perverse-c'runinal" unconsnous have led 
people to make a dangerous monster out of the unconscious, 
that really very natural t1ung As 1f a11 that IS good, reason­
able, beautiful and worth bvmg for had taken up its abode 
m coI1SCJ.ousncss I Have the horrors of the World War really 
not op<>ned our eyes? Are we still unable to see that man's 
conqcious mtnd 1s even more devilish and pervcr<;e than the 
UllCOilSClotlq ;i 
I was recently rt'proached with the charge that my 
teaclnng about the ru.suntlabon of the unconsc1ous, were 
1t accepted, would undcmnne culture and exalt pnnutl.VIty 
at the cost of our highest values. Such an opimon can 
have no foundatlon other than the erroneous behef that 
the unconscious is a monster. Such a view arises from fear 
of nature and of hfe as 1t actually 1s Freud has invented 
the idea of subhmation to save us from the una.gmary claws 
of the unconsc10us But what actually exists cannot be 
alchenustlcally subhmated, and d anything 1s apparently 
subhmated, 1t never was what a false mterpretatlon took 
1t tobe. 
The unconscious is not a demonic monster, but a thing 
of nature that is perfectly neutral as far as moral sense, 
zsthetic taste and mtellectual 1udgement go. It is dangerous 
only when our co11SC1ous attitude towards 1t becomes 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com20 DREAM-ANALYSIS 
hopelessly false. And this danger grows in the measure 
that we practise repressions. But as soon as the patient 
begins to assmillate the conteots that were previously 
unconscious, the danger from the side of the unconscious 
dimimshes. AB the process of assimilation goes on, it puts 
an eod to the dissociation of the pmonality and to the 
anxiety that attends and inspires the separation of the two 
realms of the psyche. That wluch my critic feared-I 
mean the overwhehning of consciousness by the unconscious 
-is most hkely to occur when the unconscious is excluded 
from We by repressions, or is nnsunderstood and depreaated 
A fundamental nu.stake, and one wluch 1S commonly 
made, is this . it is supposed that the contents of the 
UDCOllSClOUS are uneqmvocal and are marked with plus or 
minus signs that are 1D1Jnutable As I see the question, 
this view is too naive. The psyche 1s a seli-regulatmg 
system that mamtains itself in equilibrium as the body 
does. Every process that goes too fa:r immedistely and 
inevitably calls forth a compensatory activity. Without 
such adjustments a normal m.etabohsm would not eXISt, 
nor would the normal psyche. We can take the idea of 
compensabon, so understood, as a law of psychic happenmg 
Too httle on one side results m too much on the other. 
The relation between conscious and unconscious 1S com­
pensatory. This fact, whJ.Cb. JS easily venfiable, affords a 
rule for dream mterpretation. It is always helpful, when 
we set out to mterpret a dream, to ask · What conscious 
attitude does it compensate ? 
Although compensation may take the form of imagmary 
wish-fulfilment, it generally presents itself as an actuahty 
wluch becomes the more strikingly actual the more we try 
to repress it. We know that we do not conquer thirst by 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS ZI 
repressing 1t. The dream-content is to be taken in all 
senousness as something that has actually happened to 
us ; 1t should be treated as a. contnbutory factor m fra.mmg 
our conscious outlook. If we do not do tlns, we shall keep 
that one-sided, conscious attitude which evoked the uncon­
SCIOUS compensation in the first place. But this way holds 
httle hope of our ever Judgmg ourselves correctly or findmg 
any balance m hie 
If anyone should set out to replace his conscious outlook 
by the dictates of the unconSCIOUs---<md this is the prospect 
which my critics find so alanmng-he would only succeed 
in repressing the former, and it would reappear as an 
uncOllSClous compensahon. The uncoDSC10us would thus 
have changed its face and completely reversed 1ts pos1tion. 
It would have become tinudly reasonable, m strikmg 
contrast to its fonner tone. It is not generally believed 
that the unconscious operates in tlus way, yet such reversals 
constantly take place and constitute its essential functlon, 
This is why every dream is a source of mformation and 
a means of self-regulatwn, and why dreams are our most 
effective aids m the task of buikhng up the porsonahty. 
The UllCOllSClOUS itself does not harbour explosive 
matenals, but 1t may become ex:plOSJ.ve owing to the 
repressions exercised by a self-suflicient, or cowardly, 
conscious outlook. All the more reason, then, for givmg 
heed to that Side I It should now be clear why I have made 
1t a practical rule always to ask, before trymg to interpret 
a dream . What conscious attitude does it compensate ? 
As may be seen, I thus bring the dream into the closest 
possible connection with the CODSClOUS state. I even 
ma.mtain that it is imposs1ble to mterpret a dream with 
any degree of certamty 11Illess we kn.ow what the CODSClOUS 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com•• DREAM-ANALYSIS 
situation is. For it is only in the light of this knowledge 
that we can make out whether the unconscious content 
carries a plus or mmus sign. The dream is not an :LSOlated 
psychk event completely cut off from daily We. If it seems 
so to us, that is only an illusion that anses from our lack 
of understanding In reality, the relation between con­
SC1ousness and the dream is strictly causal, and they interact 
in the subtlest of ways. 
I should hke to show WJ.th the help of an illustrab.on how 
important it is to find the trne value of unconscious contents. 
A young man brought me the following dream : " My 
father is driving away from the house in bis new car. He 
dnves very clumsily, and I get very excited about !us 
apparent stupidity He goes tlus way and that, forward 
and backward, repeatedly gettmg the car mto a tight place 
Fmally he runs into a wall and badly damages the car. 
I shout at hun m a perfect rage, telling bun he ought to 
behave lmnsell My lather only laughs, and then I see 
that he is dead drunk." There is no foundab.on in fact 
for the dream The dreamer is convinced that lus father 
would never behave m that way, even 1f he were drunk. 
The dreamer himself lS used to cars ; he is a careful dnver, 
and very moderate in the use of alcohol, especially when he 
has to drive. Bad dnvmg, and even slight inJunes to the 
car, imtate him greatly. The son's relatwn to his father 
is good He admires lum for being an unusually successful 
man We can say, without any attempt at mterpTetation, 
that the dream presents a vecy unfavourable picture of 
the father What, then, should we take its meaniDg to 
be as far as the son IS concerned ? Is 1ns relation to blS 
lather good only in appearance, and does 1t really consist 
of over-compensated resistances ? If this 1S so we should 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 23 
attnbute a plus sign to the dream-content ; we should have 
to tell the young man . " Tfus is your actual relation to 
your father." But SIDce I could find nothing equivocal or 
neurotic in the facts about the son's relation to his father. 
I had no wammt for dJsturbmg the young man's feelings 
with such a destructive pronouncement. To do so would 
have prejudiced the outcome of the treatment. 
But If !us relation to his father is really excellent, why 
must the dream manufacture such an hnprobable story to 
discredit the father ? The dreamer's unconscious must have 
a chstinct tendency to produce such a dream. Has the 
young man resistances to his father, after all, which are 
perhaps led by Jealousy or a certain sense of ioferionty ? 
But before we go out of our way to burden his conscience-­
and with sens,tlve young people there is always the risk 
that we do tlus too hghtly-we had better, for once, drop 
the question of why he had this dream, and ask ourselves 
mstead. · What for ? The answer, in tlus case, would be 
that his uoconscwus clearly tries to depreciate his father. 
If we take this as a compensation, we are forced to the 
conclusion that !us relation to his father is not only good, 
but even too good. The young man actually deserves the 
French sobnquet of jils tl papa. His father is still too 
much the guarantor of his existence, and he is still living 
what I call a provisional life. He runs the nsk of failing 
to reahze himself because there is too much " father " on 
every side. This is why the unconscious manufactures a 
kind of blasphemy : it seeks to lower the father and to 
elevate the son. "An immoral business", we may be 
tempted to say. Every father who lacks insight would be 
on his guard here. And yet this compensation is entirely 
to the point. It forces the son to contrast himself with his 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 
father, and that is the only way m which he can become 
aware of himself. 
The interpretation JUSt outlined was apparently the 
correct one, for it struck home It won the spontaneous 
assent of the young mao, aod did no violence to his feeling 
for !us lather, or to the lather's feeling for him. But this 
interpretation was only poss1ble when the father-son relation 
had been studied in the light of all the fa.cts that were 
accessible to consciousness. Without a knowledge of the 
conscious SJ.tuation the true meaning of the dream would 
have remained in doubt. 
It is of the first rmportance for the assimilation of dream­
contents that no violence be done to the real values of 
the conscious personality. If the conscious personality is 
destroyed, or even crippled, there is no one left to do the 
assunilating. When we recognize the importance of the 
unCODSClous we are not embarkmg upon a Bolshevist 
experiment winch puts the lowest on top. This would only 
bring about a return of the situation we are trying to correct. 
We must see to it that the conscious persona.bty remains 
mta.ct, for we can only tum the unconscious compensa:b.ons 
to good account when the coDSCious personality co-operates 
in the venture. When 1t comes to the assimilation of a 
content 1t is never a question of "this or that ", but of 
"tlus ·""that". 
Just as the interpretation of dreams requires exact 
knowledge of the COllSClOUS ""'1fs quo, so the treatment of 
dream symbolis;m demaods that we take into a.coount the 
dreamer's plulooopbical, religious and moral convictions. 
It is far wiser in practice not to rega,d the dream-symbols 
as signs or symptoms of a fixed character. We should 
rather take them as true symbols-that is to say, as 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 
expressions of something not yet consciously recognized or 
conceptually fonnulated. In adchtion to this, they must 
be considered in relation to the dreamer's immechate state 
of CODSC1ousness. I emphasize that tins way of treating 
the dream-symbols IS advisable in practice because theoretic­
ally there do exist relatively fixed symbols whose meaning 
must on no account be referred to anything whose content 
IS known, or to anytlung that can be formulated m concepts. 
If there were no relatively fixed symbols, it would be 
unpossible to determine the structure of the uncOOSCious 
There would be nothing in it which could be in any way 
laid hold of or described. 
It may seem strange that I should attribute an indefinite 
content to the relatively fixed symbols But it is the 
indefinite content that marks the symbol as against the 
mere sign or symptom. It is well known that the Freudian 
school operates with hard and fast sexual ., symbols " , 
but these are 1ust what l should call SlgllS, for they are 
made to stand for sexuahty, and this 1s supposed to be 
something definitive. As a matter of fact, Freud's concept 
of sexuality is thoroughly elastic, and so vague that it 
can be made to include ahn.ost anytlung The word 1tseH 
is familiar, but what it denotes amounts to an indeter­
minable or vanable x that stands for the physiological 
activity of the glands at one extreme and the Jugh .. t 
reaches of the spirit at the otber. Instead of taking a 
dogmahc stand that rests upon the illusion that we know 
somethmg because we have a familiar word fOT it. I prefer 
to regard the symbol as the announcement of something 
unknown, bard to recognize and not to be fully determined. 
Take, for instance, the so-called phallic symbols, which are 
supposed to stand for the - .,n1, and nothing 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com26 DREAM-ANAL YSJS 
more. Psychologically speaking, the membnms is itself­
as Kranefeldt has recently pointed out-a symbolic unage 
whose wider content camiot easily be determined. As was 
customary throughout antiqmty, primitive people today 
make a free use of phallic symbols, yet it never occurs to 
them to confuse the phallus, as a ntualistic symbol, with 
the penis. They always take the phallus to mean the 
creative mana, the power of heahng and fertility, " that 
which is unusually potent ", to use Lehmann's expression 
Its equivalents in mythology and in dreams are the bull, 
the ass, the pomegranate, the y,mi, the he-goat, the lightning, 
the hmse's hoof, the dance, the magical cohabitatJ.on in the 
furrow, and the menstrual fluid, to mentJ.on only a few of 
many. That which UI1derhes all of these images-and 
sexuality itself-is an archetypal content that is hard to 
grasp, and that finds ,ts best psycholog,cal express10D m 
the pmmtive mana. symbol. In ea.eh of the unages given 
above we can see a relatively fixed symbol-u. the num11 
symbol-but we camiot for all that be certain that when 
they occur in dreams they have no other m.eamng 
The practical need may call for quite another inter­
pretation. To be sure, if we had to interpret dreams m an 
exhaustive way a.ccordmg to scienWic principles, we should 
have to refer every such symbol to an archetype. But, in 
practice, this kind of interpretation might be a grave 
blunder, for the patient's psychological state may reqmre 
anything rather than the giving of attentwn to a theory 
of dreams. It is therefore advisable, for the purposes of 
therapy, to look for the meaning of symbols as they relate 
to the COllSC10US situation-in other words, to treat them as 
if they were not fixed. This is as much as to say that we 
must renounce all preconceived opinions, however knowing 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS .., 
they make us feel, a.nd try to discover the meaning of things 
for the pa.hent. If we do this, our interpretations will 
obvJOusly not go very far towards satisfying a theory of 
dreams ; in fact, they may fall very short in this respect, 
But if the practitioner operates too much with fixed symbols, 
there is danger of his falhng mto mere routine and dogmatism, 
thus failing to meet the patient's need. It is unfortunate 
that, to illustrate the above, I should have to go into greater 
detail tha.n space here permits, but I have elsewhere published 
illustrative ma.tenal that amply supports my statements. 
As already remarked, it frequently happens at the very 
begmning of a treatment that a dream reveals to the doctor, 
m a wide perspective, the general direction in which the 
UDCODSClOUS IS moving But, for practical reasons, 1t may 
not be fea.sJ.ble to make clear to the patient, at thIS early 
stage, the deeper meamng of Ins dream. The demands of 
therapy are bmdmg upon us m this way also When the 
doctor gains such a far-reaclung msigb.t, 1t is thanks to his 
expenence m the matter of relatively fixed symbols. Such 
insight can be of the very greatest value m diagnosis and 
m prognoSIS as well. I was once consulted in the case of a 
seventeen-year-old girl One specialist had suggested that 
she IIllght be in the first stages of progresmve atrophy of 
the muscles, whtle another thought that she was a hystenc. 
Because of this second opimon, I was called in. The chmcal 
picture made me suspect an organic disease, but the girl 
showed trwts of hystena as well I asked for dreams. The 
patient answered a.t once : " Yes, I have terrible dreams 
Just recently I dreamed I was coming home at night. 
Everything ,s as quiet as death. The door into the hvmg­
room is half open, and I see my mother hangmg from the 
chandelier and swinging to and fro in a cold wind that 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com28 DREAM-ANALYSIS 
blows in through the open windows. At another time I 
dreamed that a terrible noise breaks out in the house at 
night. I go to see what has happened, and find that a 
fnghtened horse is tearing through the rooms. At last it 
finds the door into the hall, and jumps through the hall 
wmdow from the fourth floor down mto the street. I was 
tenifi.ed to see it lying below, all mangled." 
The way in wlnch these dreams allude to death IS enough 
to give one pa.use. But many persons have aruaety dreams 
now and then. We must therefore look .more closely mto 
the mea.nu,g of the outstanding symbols, " mother " and 
" horse ". These figures must be eq111valent one to the 
other, for they both do the same thiJlg . they commit 
suicide The mother symbol is archetypal and refers to 
a place of origm, to nature, that which passively creates, 
hence to substance and matter, to material nature, the lower 
body (womb) and the vegetative functions It connotes 
also the unconscious, natural and mstinctive hie, the 
physiological realm, the body in wluch we dwell or are 
contained, for the " mother " is also a vessel, the hollow 
form (Ntems) that carries and nourishes, and it thus stands 
for the foundations of consc10usness. Being within same­
thmg or contamed in something suggests darkness, the 
nocturnal-a state of amaety With these allUS1ons I am 
presentmg the idea of the mother m many of its mythological 
and etymological transformations , I am also giving an 
important part of the y,n concept of Chinese phtlosophy. 
All this 1s dream-content, but 1t is not somethmg which 
the seventeen-year-old girl has acqwred in her individual 
existence ; it is rather a bequest from the past. On the 
ooe hand it has been kept ahve by the language, and on 
the other hand it is inherited with the structure of the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS Z9 
psyche and is therefore to be found in all times and among 
all peoples. 
The familiar word " mother " refers apparently to the 
best-known of mothers in particular-to " my mother ". 
But the mother symbol points to a darker meaning which 
eludes conceptual formulation aocl can only be vaguely 
apprehended as the lndden, nature-bound hfe of the body. 
Yet even this expression JS too narrow, and excludes too 
maoy pertioeot side-meanings The psychic reality which 
underlies this symbol is so mconceivably complex that we 
cao only cbscero 1t from afar off, and theo but very chmly 
It IS such realities that call for symbohc expression. 
If we apply our findings to the dream, its m.eamng will 
be the unconscious hfe destroys itself That is the dream's 
message to the conscious mmd of the dreamer and to 
everyone who has ears to hear 
" Horse " is an archetype that is widely current m 
mythology and folk-lore. As an ammal. 1t represents the 
non-human psyche, the sub-human, animal side, and 
therefore the unconSCious This is why the horse in folk­
lore sometunes sees VlSi.ons, hears voices, and speaks. As 
a beast of burden 1t is closely related to the mother­
archetype ; the Valk.ynes bear the dead hero to Valhalla 
and the Troian horse encloses the Greeks. As an arum.al 
lower than mao 1t represents the lower part of the body and 
the annnal drives that take thCII' nse from there The horse 
is dynanuc power and a means of locomotion , it cam.es 
one away hke a surge of instinct It is subject to pa.mes 
like all instinctive creatures who lack higher consciousness. 
Also it has to do with sorcery aod magical spells-<specially 
the black, night horse which heralds death 
It ,. evideot, theo, that " horse " 1S the equivalent of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com30 DREAM-ANALYSIS 
" mother " with a slight shift of meaning. The mother 
stands for life at its origin, and the horse for the merely 
animal life of the body. If we apply this meanmg to the 
dream, it says : the animal life destroys itself. 
The two dreams make nearly the same assertion, but, as 
is usually the case, the second is more specific. The pecuhar 
subtlety of the dream. is brought out in both instances . 
there is no mention of the death of the individual. It is 
notorious that one often dreams of one's own death, but 
that is no serious matter. When 1t is really a quest:J.on of 
death, the dream speaks another language Both of these 
dreams, then, point to a serious, and even fatal, orgamc 
disease. The prognosis was shortly after borne out in fact 
As for the relatively fixed symbols, tins example gives a 
fa.J.r idea of their general nature There are a great many 
of them, and they may differ in individual cases by subtle 
shifts of meaning. It IS cmly through comparative studies 
in mythology, folk-lore, rebgion and language that we can 
determine these symbols in a scientific way. The evolu­
tionary stages through which the human psyche has passed 
are more clearly discermble in the dream than in conscious 
ness. The dream speaks in unages, and gives expression 
to instincts, that are derived from the most primitive levels 
of natnre. Conscionsness all too easily departs frnm the 
law of nature ; but it can be brought again into harmony 
with the latter by the assimilation of unconscious contents 
By fostering this process we lead the patient to the 
rediscovery of the law of his own being. 
I have not been able, in so short a space, to deal with 
anything but the elements of the subject. I could not put 
together before ycmr eyes, stooe by stooe, the edifice that 
is reared in every analysis from the materials of the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDREAM-ANALYSIS 31 
unconscious and finds its completion in the restoration of 
the total personality The way of successive assimilations 
reaches far beyond the curative results that specifically 
concern the doctor. It leads in the end to that distant 
goal (which may perhaps have beeo the first urge to hie), 
the bringing mto reabty of the whole human being-that is, 
indivuluation. We physicians are without doubt the first 
scientific observers of these obscure processes of nature. 
As a rule we see only a pathological phase of the development, 
and lose mght of the patient as soon as he is cured. But 
it is only when the cure has been effected that we are in 
a posit10n to study the normal process of change, itself 
a matter of years or decades. If we had some knowledge 
of the ends towards which unconscious, psychic growth 1s 
tendmg, and 11 our psychological insight were not drswn 
exclUS1vely from the pathological phase, we should have 
a less confused idea of the processes revealed by dreams 
and a clearer recognition of what it is that the symbols 
point to In my opimon, every doctor should be aware of 
the fact that psychotherapy in general, and analysis in 
particular, is a procedure that breaks into a pUipOSeful and 
continuous development, now here and now there, and 
thus singles out particular phases which may seem to follow 
opposlDg courses. Since every analysis by itself shows only 
one part or aspect of the deeper course of development, 
nothing but hopeless confusion can result from casuistic 
comparisons. For this reason I have preferred to confine 
myself to the rudiments of the subject and to practical 
considerations. It is only in actual contact with the facts as 
they occux that we can come to anything like a satisfactory 
agreement. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comII 
PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
PSYCHOTHERAPY, or the treatment of the m..uul by psycho­
logical methods, is 1denttfied in popular thought today wtth 
" psychoanalysis ". Tlus word is now so widely accepted 
that everyone who uses it seems at the same time to grasp 
its meanmg ; yet 1t is seldom that a layman knows precisely 
what 1t covers. 
According to the intention of its creator, Freud, 1t can 
be appropriately applied only to his own particular method 
of explairung psyclnc symptoms in terms of certain repressed 
unpu]ses Inasmuch. as this technique JS the consequence 
of a particular approach to hfe, the idea of psychoanalysis 
mclud.es certain theoreb.cal assumptions, among them the 
Freudian theory of sexuahty. The founder of psychoanalys,s 
hlDlSelf exphcltly insists upon thIS circumscripbon. But, 
Freud notwithstandmg. the layman applies the concept of 
psychoanalysis to every kmd of mod.em endeavour to 
probe the mind by scientific methods. Thus Adler's school 
must submit to being labelled " psychoanalytic " desplte 
the fact that Adler's view-point and method are apparently 
in in'econcilable opposition to those of Freud. Because 
of this cootrast, Adler himself does not call his teaching 
" psychoanalysis ", but " individual psychology " ; while I 
prefer to call my own approach " aoalytical psychology ". 
I wish the term to stand for a general conception embracing 
3" 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 33 
both " psychoanalysis " and " individual psychology ", as 
well as other efforts in this field. 
Smee the mind is common to mankind it may seem to the 
layman that there can be ooly one psychology, and he may 
therefore suppose the divergences between the schools to 
be either subJective qmbbbng, or else a commonplace 
chsgwse for the efforts of mediocrities who seek to exalt 
themselves upon a throne. I could easily lengthen the 
list of " psychologies " by mentioning other systems that 
are not to be included. under the head of " analytical 
psychology " There are, in fact, many methods, stand­
points, views and convictJ.ons w1ucb. are all at war with one 
another-the main reason for this bemg that, smce they 
fatl to be mutually comprehellSlble, none of them can grant 
the validity of any other The many-sidedness and vanety 
of psychological opmions m our tune 1S notlung less than 
aston1slu.ng, and 1t IS confusing for the layman that no 
general survey of them can be made. 
When we find the most diverse remedies prescnbed in 
a text-book of pathology for a given disease, we may con­
fidently assume that none of these remedies lS particularly 
efficactous. So, when many chfferent ways of approaching 
the psyche are recommended, we may rest assured that 
none of them leads with absolute certainty to the goal, 
least of all those advocated in a fanatical way. The very 
number of present-day " psychologies " amounts to a 
confessioo of perplexity. The dlJ!iculty of gauung access to 
the mind is gradually borne in upon us, and the mind it.sell 
is seen to be, to use Nietzsche's expression, a " homed " 
problem It IS small wonder therefore that efforts to attack 
this elusive nddle are multiplied, first from one side and 
then from another. The variety of contradictory standpoints 
C 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com34 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTIIERAPY 
and opuuons of which we have spoken is the mevitable 
result. 
The reader will doubtless agree that in discussing psycho­
analysis we should not lumt ourselves to its narrower 
defimtion, but deal in general with the results and failures 
of the vanous contemporary endeavours to solve the problem 
of the psyche-endeavours which we have agreed shall all 
be embraced in the concept of analytical psychology. 
And moreover, why is there suddenly so much interest 
m the human psyche as something to be experienced ? 
Tins has not been the case for thousands of years I W1Sh 
merely to raise this apparently irrelevant question, and 
will not try to answer it. It is in reahty not irrelevant, 
because tins mterest underhes all such modern movements 
as theosophy, occultism, astrology and so forth 
All that is embraced today m the layman's idea of 
" psychoanalyS1S " originated in medJ.cal practice ; and 
consequently most of 1t is medtcal psychology. It bears 
the ummstakable imprint of the physician's consultmg­
room-a fact which is evident not only in 1ts terminology, 
but also in its framework of theory. We constantly come 
upon postulates wluch the physician has taken over from 
natural science and in parbcular from biology. Tins fact 
has largely contnbuted to the hostility between modem 
psychology and the academic fields of philosophy, Iustory 
and ciass,ca] learning. Modem psychology is empincal 
and close to nature, while these studies are grounded m the 
intellect. The chstance between nature and mind, difficult 
to bridge at best, is increased by a medical and biological 
nomenclature which sometnnes appears of practical utility, 
but more often severely taxes our good-will. 
In view of the confUS1on of concepts that exists, I have 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 35 
felt it necessary to indulge in the foregoing general remarks. 
I should hke now to turn to the task in hand and consid,r 
the actual aclnevements of analytical psychology. Since 
the various endeavours embraced by this term are so 
heterogeneous, it is extremely difficult to take up a generally 
inclusive standpomt. If, then, with regard to the aims and 
results of these endeavours, I try to distinguish certam 
classes, or rather stages, I do it with some reservation. 
I regard 1t as a merely provisional arrangement, and grant 
that 1t may seem as arbitrary as a surveyor's triangulation 
of a country. Be that as it may, I venture to arrange the 
sum-total of findings under the four heads of confession, 
explanation, ed.ucat100, and transformation. I shall now 
proceed to discuss the meamng of these somewhat unusual 
terms 
The first begumings of all analytical treatment are to be 
found in its prototype, the confessional Since, however, 
the two pra.cb.ces have no direct causal connection, but 
rather grow from a comm.on psychic root, 1t is drliicult for 
an outsider to see at once the relahon between the ground­
work of psychoanalysis and the religious msb.tu:hon of the 
confessional 
As soon as man was capable of conceiving the idea of 
sm, he had recourse to psychic concealment-or, to put 
it m analytical language, represmons arose Anytbmg that 
is concealed IS a secret. The maintenance of secrets acts 
hlce a psychic poison which alienates their possessor from 
the community. In small doses, this poison may actually 
be a pnceiess remedy, even an essential preliminary to the 
differentiation of the inchvtdual. T1us is so much the case 
that, even on a pnmitive level, man has :felt an irresishble 
need to invent secrets • their possess10D saves him :from 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com36 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTIIERAPY 
dissolving in the unconsciousness of mere community life, 
and thus from a fatal psychic inJury. As is well known, the 
many ancient mystery cults with their secret rituals served 
this mstinct for differentiation Even the Christian sacra­
ments were looked upon as mysteries m the early Church, 
and, as in the case of baptism, were celebrated in private 
apartments and only referred to under a veil of allegory. 
Howwer beneficra.1 a secret shared with several persons 
may be, a merely pnvate secret has a destructive effect 
It resembles a burden of gutlt winch cuts off the unfortunate 
possessor from communion with hts fellow-be!llgll. Yet if 
we are CODSClOUS of what we conceal, the hann done is 
deculedly less than if we do not know what we are repressmg 
-or even that we have repressions at all. In the latter 
case we not merely keep a content CODSClously pnvate, but 
we conceal it even from ourseh•es. It then sphts off from 
consciousness as an independent complex, to lead a separate 
ex15tence m the unconscious, where 1t can be neither 
corrected nor interfered with by the conscious mmd. The 
complex is thus an autonomous porb.on of the psyche wluch, 
as experience has shown, develops a pecuhar fantasy-hie 
of its own What we call fantasy is simply spontaneous 
psychic activity ; and it wells up whenever the repressive 
acb.on of the conscious mind relaxes or ceases altogether, 
as in sleep. In sleep this activity shows itself in the form 
of dreams. And we contmue to dream m waking life 
beneath the threshold of consciousness, especially when 
this activity is conditioned by a repressed or otherwise 
unconscions complex It should be said in passing that 
unCOllSClOUS contents are by no means exclusively such as 
were once conscious and, by being repressed, have later 
grown into 1lllCOJl8cious complexes. Qw.te otherwise, the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTIIERAPY 37 
UDCOllSClOUS has contents peculiar to itself wluch, slowly 
growing upward from the depths. at last come into conscious­
ness. We should therefore in no wise picture the unconscious 
psyche to ourselves as a mere receptacle for contents discarded 
by the conSCious mmd. 
All psychic contents wluch either approach the threshold 
of consciousness from below. or have sunk only slightly 
beneath 1t, have an effect upon our conscious activities. 
Since the content itself is not conscwus, these effects are 
necessanly indirect. Most of our lapses of the tongue, 
of the pen, of memory, and the hke, are traceable to these 
disturbances, as are hkewise all neurone symptoms These 
are nearly always of psychic ongin, the excepb.ons being 
shock effects from shell-explosions and other causes The 
mildest forms of neurosis are the " lapses " already referred 
to-blunders of speech, the sudden forgetting of names 
and dates, unexpected clumsiness leadmg to mJunes or 
accJ.dents, nusund.erstandmgs of personal motives or of what 
we have heard or read, and so-called hallucinations of 
memory which cause us to suppose erroneously that we 
have said or done t1us or that. In all these cases a thorough 
investigation can show the existence of a content wluch m 
an indirect and UDCODSCIOUS way has distorted the CODSClOUS 
performance. 
In general, therefore, an unconscious secret lS more 
harmful than one that is conscious I have seen many 
patients in difficult situations of hie wlnch might have 
driven weaker natures to SUIClde. These patients had at 
times a tendency towards suicide, but, on account of their 
inherent reasonableness, would not allow the sw.cidal urge 
to come mto consciousness. But 1t remained active m the 
unconscious, and brought about all kinds of dangerous 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com38 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
accidents-as for instance an attack of faintness or hesitation 
in front of an advancing motor-car, the swallowing of 
corrosive sublimate in the belief that 1t was a cough mixture, 
a sudden zest for dangerous acrobatics, and so forth When 
it was possible to make the sw.cidal leaning COllSClOUS, 
common-sense could helpfully mtervene ; the patients could 
then recognize and avoid those situations that tempted them 
to self-destruction. 
As we have seen, every personal secret has the effect of 
a sin or of guilt-whether or not it is, from the standpoint 
of popular morality, a wrongful secret Now another form 
of concealment is the act of " withhoWing "-it bemg 
usually emotions that are withheld. As m the case of 
secrets, so here also we must make a reservation self­
restraint is healthful and benefi.ctal ; 1t is even a virtue. 
This 1S why we find self-chsciphne to have been one of man's 
earliest moral attainments Among prurutive peoples 1t 
has its place in the initiation ceremomes, chiefly in the 
fonns of ascetic contmence and the st01cal endurance of 
pain and fear Self-restraint, however, is here practised 
within the secret society as something undertaken in com­
pany with others But if self-restraint is only a pnvate 
matter, and perhaps dev01d of any rehgious aspect, then 1t 
may be as harmful as the personal secret. From this kind 
of self-restraint come our well-known ugly moods and the 
imtabihty of the over-virtuous. The emotion withheld is 
also something we conceal-something which we can h1de 
even from ourselves-an art in which men partJ.cularly 
excel, while women, with very few exceptions, are by nature 
averse to domg such violence to their emotions. When 
emotion is withheld. it tends to isolate and dtsturb us quite 
as much as an unconscious secret, and is equally gwlt-lad.en. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 39 
Just as nature bears us ill-will, as it were, if we possess a 
secret to which mankind has not attained, so also has she 
a grudge agamst us 1f we WJ.thhold our emotwns from our 
fellow-men Nature decidedly abhors a vacuum in this 
respect, m the long run nothmg 1S more unbearable than 
a tepid harmony m personal relations brought about by 
withholdmg emotion The repressed emotions are often of 
a kind we W1Sh to keep secret. But more often there is no 
secret worthy of the name , there are merely quite avowable 
emotions whu:h, from being withheld at some important 
Juncture, have become unCOI1SC1ous 
It is probable that one form of neurosis is conditioned 
by the predominance of secrets, and another by the pre­
dommance of restramed emotions At any rate the 
hysterical subject, who is very free with his emotions, is 
most often the possessor of a secret, whtle the hardened 
psychastheru.c suffers from mabihty to digest lns emotions. 
To cherish secrets and to restrain emotwns are psychic 
misdemeanours for which nature finally VIsits us with 
sickness-that is, when we do these tlungs m private 
But when they are done m communion with others they 
satlsfy nature and may even count as useful virtues It is 
only restramt practised m and for oneself that is unwhole­
some. It IS as 1£ man had an mall.enable right to behold 
all that is dark, imperfect, stupid and gwlty in Ins fellow­
bemgs----for such of course are the things that we keep 
pnvate to protect ourselves. It seems to be a Sill m the 
eyes of nature to huie our insuffiaency-just as much as to 
hve entirely on our mferior SJ.d.e There appears to be a 
coI1SC1ence in mankind which severely punishes the man 
who does not somehow and at some time, at whatever cost 
to his pnde, cease to defend and assert himself, and instead 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com40 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTiiERAPY 
confess himseH fallible and human Until he can do this, an 
impenetrable wall shuts him out from the livmg experience 
of feeling himself a man among men. Here we find a key 
to the great significance of true, unstereotyped confession­
a significance known in all the m1tiation and mystery cults 
of the ancient world, as is shown by a sa.ymg from the 
Greek mysteries . " Give up what thou hast, and then thou 
wilt receive ". 
We may well take this saying as a motto for the first 
stage in psychotherapeutic treatment It is a fact that the 
begmnings of psychoanalys,s were fundamentally nothmg 
else than the scientific rediscovery of an ancient truth ; even 
the name catharsis (or cleansmg), which was given to the 
earhest method of treatment, comes from the Greek miba:b.on 
rites. The early method of cathams consisted in putting 
the pa.tJ.ent, with or without hypnotic a.id, in touch with 
the hmterland of lus mmd-that is to say, into that state 
wbJ.ch the Eastern yoga systems descnbe as meditation or 
contemplatwn In contrast to the meditation found m 
yoga practice, the psychoanalytic aun tS to observe the 
shadowy presentations-whether in the fonn of unages or 
of feeb.ngs-that are spontaneously evolved m the uncon­
scious psyche and appear without Ins b1ddmg to the man 
who looks withm. In this way we find once more things 
that we have repressed or forgotten Painful though 1t 
may be, t1ns is in itself a gam-for what 1s inferior or even 
worthless belongs to me as my shadow and gives me 
substance and mass. How can I be substantial if I fail to 
cast a shadow ? I must have a dark side also if I am to 
be whole , and inasmuch as I become conscious of my 
shadow I also remember that I am a human bemg hke any 
other. In any case, when I keep 1t to myself, tins rediscovery 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLE.111S OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 4r 
of that which makes me whole restores the condition wlnch 
preceded the neuroSlS or the splitting off of the complex. In 
keeping the matter pnvate I have only attained a partial 
cure-for I still contmue m my state of isolation It is 
only with the help of confession that I am able to throw 
myself into the arms of humanity freed at last from the 
burdeo of moral e,ale, The goal of treatmeot by catharsis 
JS full confession-no merely intellectual acknowledgement 
of the facts, but their confi.rmahon by the heart and the 
actual release of the suppressed emotions 
As can easily be imagmed, such confessions have a great 
effect with simple people, and their curative results are 
often astorushmg Yet I do not wish to pomt to the fact 
that some patients are cured as being the mam achievement 
of psychotherapy at thts level , what I WlSh. to call attention 
to IS the systematic emphasis given to the significance of 
confesswn It 1S this wluch stakes home to all of us For 
we are all m some way or other kept asunder by our secrets. 
and mstead of seekmg through confession to bridge the 
abysses that separate us from one another, we choose the 
easy by-way of deceptive opuuons and illUS10ns. In saying 
tlus, however, I am far from W1Shmg to enunciate a general 
maxun It would be hard to go too far m condemning the 
bad taste of a common, mutual confession of sins. The fact 
estabhshed by psychology IS simply tins : we are dealing 
here with a d.ehcate matter. We cannot handle 1t directly or 
by itself, for 1t offers us a problem with unusually " pointed 
horns." A consideration of the next stage----that of explana­
boo-will make tins clear. 
It IS evident enough that the new psychology would have 
remained at the stage of confession had catharsw proved 
itself a panacea. First and foremost. it is not always possible 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com42 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
to bring certain patients close enough to the unconscious 
to enable them to perceive the shadows. Indeed, there 
are many pzbents, for the most part comphcated, mgbly 
conscious penons. who are so firmly anchored in CODSClOUS­
ness that nothing can pry them loose They often develop 
the most violent resistances whenever an attempt is made 
to push COllSClousness aside , they WJ.Sh to talk WJ.th the 
physician of tlungs about whi.ch they are fully consc1ous­
to make their ddliculties intelliglble and to discuss them. 
They already have quite enough to confess, they say , they 
do not have to tum to the unconscwus for that For such 
patients a complete techmque for effecting the approach 
to the UDCODSClOUS 1S needed 
ThlS is one fact wluch at the outset senously restncts us 
1n applymg the method of catharsis The other hm1tatlon 
is revealed later on, and its chscussion at once leads us to 
the problems of the second stage-the stage of explanatwn. 
I.et us suppose that m a given case the confession demanded 
by the method of catharsis bas taken place-that the 
neurosis has disappeared, or that the symptoms at least 
have vanished The patient could now be chsnussed as 
cured if 1t depended on the physician al.one. But he-or 
especially she-cannot get away. The patient seems bound 
to the physician by the act of confession If th,s apparently 
meaningless attachment is fombly severed, there is a bad 
relapse. 
It IS both cunous and significant that there are cases 
where no attachment develops. The patient goes away 
apparently cured-but he is now so fascmated by the 
hmterland of his own mmd that he conbnues to practise 
catharsis by lwnself at the expense of his adaptation to 
life He is bound to the uncon.sclous-to himself-not to 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 43 
the physician. He has obviously shared the experience of 
Theseus and his comrade Pirithous in their descent to 
Hades to bring back the goddess of the underworld Tiru,g 
on the way. they sat down to rest for a while, only to find 
that they had grown to the rocks and could not rise 
These curious and unexpected occurrences must be 
explained to the patients, while the first-mentioned cases 
who were inaccessible to catharsis must also be handled by 
the method of explanation In spite of the fact that the 
two classes of patients are apparently quite different, 1t ts 
at the same point that explanation is called for-that is, 
where the problem of fixation anses, as was recognized by 
Freud This fixation IS evident enough in patients who 
have undergone catharSis, and 1t is especially clear m those 
who remam attached to the physician. Som.ethmg similar 
has already been observed as an unpleasant result of 
hypnotic treatment, but the mner mechamsm of such a tie 
was not understood. It now appears that the questionable 
bond essentially corresponds to the relation between father 
and clul.d The patient falls mto a sort of c1uldish. dependence 
from which he cannot protect himself even by reason and 
insight. The fixation IS at times astomshmgly strong-so 
much so that one suspects it of bemg fed by forces qwte out 
of the common. But since the process of transference is 
an unconscious one, the patient 1S unable to give any 
infonnabon about it We are obviously dealing with a 
new symptom-a neurotic formation directly induced by 
the treabnent. The question therefore arises : How is 
this new diffi.culty to be met ? The unmistakable outward 
SigD. of the situation is that the memory-image of the father 
with its accent of feeling is transferred to the physician. 
Inasmuch as the latter willy-nilly appears m the rale of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com44 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
father, the patient shps into a childish relation He bas 
not, of comse, been made childish by this relation , there 
was always somethmg childish about him, but 1t was 
suppressed. Now it cmnes to the surface, and-the long-lost 
father being found again-it tries to reproduce the family 
situation of childhood. Freud gave to this symptom the 
appropriate name of " transference " A certain dependence 
upon the physician who has helped you is of course normal 
and understandable en-h What is abnormal and un­
expected is the unusual obstinacy of the transference and 
its ma.ccessibility to conscious correction. 
It is one of Freud's out.standing a.cluevements to have 
explained the nature of t1ns tie-at least m the hght of 
man's personal history-and so to have cleared the way 
for an unportant advance in psychological knowledge It 
bas today been put beyond a doubt that 1t is caused by 
unconscious fantasies. These fantasies have m the Illa.ln 
what we may call an " mcestuous " character , and tins 
seems adequately to explain the fact that they remam 
lUlCODSClOUS and cannot be expected to tum up m the most 
thorough confession Although Freud always speaks of 
incest-fantasies as 1f they were repressed, further expenence 
shows us that m many cases they have never been coDSCious 
or have been sensed only m the vaguest way-for whu:h 
reason they could not be mtent:J.onally repreued. More 
recent research seems to show that the incest-fantasies 
are usually unCODSCJous and so rem.am till they are dragged 
to bght in analy1:lcal treatment. By this I do not mean 
that pulling them up from the unconscious IS an mterference 
with nature winch we should avoid ; I merely wish to 
suggest that the procedure is almost as drastic as a surgical 
operation. But it is wholly unavoidable in that the analytical 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEI\IS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 45 
procedure induces a transference which is abnormal, and 
can only be dealt with by reaching the incest-fantasies. 
While the method of cathaISlS restores to the ego such 
contents as are accessible to consciousness and are nonnally 
mcluded in it, the process of clea.nng up the transference 
brings to light conteots which, because of their nature, were 
almost inaccessible to consciousness Thts is the main 
differeoce betweeo the stage of confessioo and the stage 
of explanation. 
We have discussed above two sets of cases· those of such 
patients as do not lend themselves to the method of catharsis, 
and those for whom it gives results We have moreover 
Just treated of those whose fixation takes the form of a 
transference Besides these there are those people we have 
also mentioned who develop no attachment to the physicia.n, 
but rather one to their own unconscious, in which they 
become entangled as in a web. In these cases the parental 
unage is not transferred to a human object It is seen as 
a fantasy, and yet 1t exerts the same power of attraction 
and produces the same attachment as does the transference 
The patients who cannot give themselves without reserve 
to treatment by catharsis can be understood in the hght 
of Freudian research We can see that, even before coming 
to the doctor, they had 1dentuied themselves with their 
parents, and derive from this identification that force of 
authority, that independence and critJ.ca.l power wlnch 
enables them to offer a successful resistance to the treatment. 
These are chielly cultivated and diflereotiated persons 
While others become the helpless victims of the unconscious 
parental image, these draw strength from 1t by uocoosciously 
1dent1fymg themselves with their parents 
In the matter of the transference, we can get nowhere 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com46 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
wtth the help of confession. It was this which drove Freud 
to a fundamental renovation of Breuer's onginal technique 
of catharsis, and to what he himself called the " mter­
pretative method ". This further step necessarily follows, 
for the relationship produced by the transference especially 
requires explanation. The layman can hardly appreciate 
the importance of this , but the doctor who finds himself 
suddenly entangled in a web of incomprehensible and 
fantastic natl.ons sees it all too clearly He must interpret 
the transference to the patient-that 1s, explain to him 
what it is that he proJects upon lns doctor. Since the 
patient himself does not know what 1t lS, the physzcl.B.Il is 
forced to sub1ect what scraps of fantasy he can obtam from 
the patient to analytical mterpretat10n. It lS first and 
foremost our dreams whtch furrush thts important matenal. 
Whtle investigating the suppress10n of mshes wluch are 
incompatible with our conscious standpoint, Freud studied 
dreams m search of these wishes, and m the process d.J.s.. 
covered the incestuous contents of which I have spoken. 
These were of course not the only matenals revealed by 
the investigation ; he discovered all the filth of which 
human nature is capable-and it is notonous that 1t would 
require a hfetune to make even a rough inventory of it. 
The end-product of the Freudian method of explanation 
is a detailed elaboration of man's shadow-side such as had 
never been carried out before. It is the most effective 
antidote imaginable to all idealistic illusions about the 
nature of man; and 1t is therefore no wonder that there 
arose on all sides the most violent opposition to Freud and 
his school. We could expect nothing else of those who 
believe in illusions on principle , but I maintain that there 
are not a few among the opponents of the method of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 47 
explanation who have no illusions as to man's shadow-side, 
and who yet object to a biassed portrayal of man from the 
shadow-side alone. After all, the essential thmg is not the 
shadow, but the body whiclt casts it. 
Freud's method of interpretation rests upon " reductlve " 
explanations which unfa.1hngly lead backward and downward, 
and it has a destructive effect 1f 1t is used in an exaggerated 
and one-sided way. Nevertheless psychology has profited 
greatly from Freud's pioneer work , it has learned that 
human nature has also a black side, and that not man alone 
possesses tins sule, but Ins works, hIS mstitutions, and Ins 
conVJ.ctwns as well. Even our purest and hohest beliefs 
can be traced to the crudest origins Tlus way of lookmg at 
t1ungs even has 1ts Justification, for the begmrung of all 
hvmg organisms is Sllllple and lowly , we build our 
houses from the foundation up. No thoughtful person will 
deny that Salomon Remach's explanation of the Last Supper 
tn terms of pnnutive totemism is fraught with m.ea.mng , 
nor will he obiect to the mcest-theme bemg pointed out in 
the myths of the Greek dJ.VlllltJ.eS It is pamful-there is 
no denymg 1t-to mterpret radiant thmgs from the shadow­
side, and thus m a measure reduce them to their ongins m 
dreary filth. But 1t seems to me to be an unperfechon m 
thmgs of beauty, and a weakness m man, if an explanation 
from the shadow-mde has a destructive effect. The horror 
wluch we feel for Freudl8.Il mterpretations is entirely due 
to our own barbanc or cluldJ.sh naivete, which beheves that 
there can be he,ghts without correspondmg depths, and 
wluch blinds us to the really " final " truth that, when 
carried to extremes, opposites meet Our mistake would he 
in supposing that what is radJ.ant no longer exists because 
1t has been explained from the shadow-side. This is a 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com48 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
regrettable error into wbiclt Freud himself has fallen Yet 
the shadow belongs to the light as the evtl beloogs to the 
good, and """ ""'"· Therefore I cannot regret the shock 
that was felt at the exposure of our occidental 1UUS10ns and 
pettiness ; on the contrary, I welcome this exposure and 
attach to it an almost incalculable significance It is one 
of those swings of the pendulum which, as history has so 
often shown, set matters right again. It forces us to accept 
a present-day phtlosophical relativism such as has been 
formulated by Einstein for mathematical physics, and whtch 
is fundamentally a truth of the far East whose ultJIDate 
effects upon us we cannot foresee. 
Notlung udluences our conduct less than do mtellectual 
ideas. But when an idea JS the expresswn of psychic 
experience which bears fruit m regions as far separated and 
as free from histoncal relation as East and West, then we 
must look mto the matter closely. For such J.d.eas represent 
forces that are beyond lngu:a.l Justification and moral 
sanction ; they are always strnoger than man and his 
bram. Man beheves indeed that he moulds these ideas, but 
10 reality they mould him and make !nm their unwitting 
mouthpiece. 
To return again to the problem of fixation, I should hk:e 
now to deal with the effects of the process of explanatJ.on 
The patlent becomes aware of the unsoundness of hts 
position with respect to the doctor when his transference 
has been traced back to its dark ongms , he cannot avoid 
seeing how inappropriate and clnldJsh his claims are II he 
has been inflated by a sense of authority, he will exchange 
lns elevated position for one that is more modest, and will 
accept an insecurity which may prove very wholesome 
If he has not yet renounced Ills mlantile clauns upon the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 49 
doctor, he will now recognize the inescapable truth that to 
make clmms on others is a childish self-mdulgence which 
must be replaced by a greater sense of his own responsibility. 
The man of insight will draw his own moral conclusions 
Convinced of his own deficiencies, he will use tbts knowledge 
as a means of protection ; he will plunge into the struggle 
for existence and consume in progressive wOTk and experience 
that force of longing which has caused hun to chng obstinately 
to a child's pa.ra.di.se or at least to look back at it over his 
shoulder. A normal adaptation and patience with his own 
shortcommgs will become hIS gwdmg moral pnnetples, and 
he will try to free lmnself from sentunentahty and illusion. 
The inevitable result will be that he turns away from the 
UnconscJ.OUS as from a source of weakness and temptation­
the field of moral and social defeat 
The problem which now faces the patient is that of be1ng 
educated as a SOC1a.l being, and with this we come to the 
third stage Mere mmght mto themselves is suffictent for 
morally sensitive persons who have enough dnvmg force 
to carry them forward , for those with little imagination 
for moral values, however, it does not su.flice Without the 
spur of external necessity, self-knowledge 1S ineffective for 
them even when they are deeply convinced-to say nothing 
of those who have been struck by the analyst's mterpretation 
and yet doubt it after all. These last are mentally disciplined 
people who grasp the truth of a " reductive " explanation, 
but cannot accept 1t when 1t merely invalidates their hopes 
and ideals In these cases also mere insight is insufficient. 
It is a weakness of the method of explana'b.on that it succeeds 
only with sensitive persons who can draw mdependent 
moral conclusions from their understanding of themselves. 
It is true that we can get further with explanation than with 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com50 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
uninterpreted confession alone, for it at least trains the 
mmd, and therefore may awaken sleeping powers which 
can mtervene ma helpful way. But the fact remains that 
the most thorough explanation leaves the patient m many 
cases an intelligent but still incapable chtld. The trouble 
is that Freudian explanabons in terms of pleasure and its 
satisfaction are one-sided and therefore insufficient, espectally 
wheo applied to the later stages of development. Tlus 
viewpoint will not account for everybody , for even 1f 
everyone possesses this side, 1t is not always the most 
nnportant. A hungry artist prefers bread to a beautrlul 
paintmg, and a man in love prefers a woman to his pubhc 
career , yet the pamtmg may be of the greatest importance 
to the one and pubhc office to the other. On the average, 
those who easily achieve social adaptation and soctal position 
are better accounted for by the pleasure pnnciple than are 
the unadapted whose social shortcommgs leave them with 
a cravmg for power and lIIlportance The older brother 
who follows m the footsteps of his father and attams a 
commanding pom:b.on, may be tortured by his de!W'es , but 
the younger brother who feels repressed and overshadowed 
by the other two, may be goaded by ambition or the craving 
for respect. He may even yield so completely to this passion 
that nothing else is vital to him. 
At tlns point we become aware that Freud's explanation 
of things falls short, and it IS prec,sely here that Ins former 
puptl, Adler, comes forward to fill the gap Adler has shown 
convincingly that many cases of neurosis can be more 
satlifactorily explained on the ground of an urge to power 
than by the pleasure principle. His mterpretation therefore 
is designed to show the patient that he " arranges " his 
symptoms and exploits his neurosis to attain a fictitious 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 5z 
importance ; that even his transference and Ins other 
fixations serve his will to power. and thus represent a 
" masculme protest " against a flmcied subJection. Adler 
obviously has his eye on repressed and socially unsuccessful 
people whose one passion is for self-assertion. These people 
are neurotic because they always imagme themselves 
oppressed and t,!t at the windmills of their own fancies, 
thus putting the goal they most desll'e quite out of reach. 
In essenbals, Adler's method begms at the second stage, 
he explains the symptoms m the sense Just mdu:ated, and 
to thts extent appeals to the patient's understanding. Yet 
1t lS characteristic of Adler that he does not expect too 
mucb of understanding, but, taking a further step, has 
clearly recognized the need for social education. Whtle 
Freud IS an mvestigator and mterpreter, Adler is clnefl.y 
an educator. In refusmg to leave the patient in a clulchsh 
condition, helpless for all his valuable understand.mg, and 
in trying by every device of education to make h1m a 
normally adapted person, Adler modifies Freud's procedure 
He does all this apparently in the conviction that SOC1al 
adaptation and normalization are indispensable-that they 
are even the most desirable goals and the most st11table 
fulfilment for a human being. The widespread social 
mfluence of Adler's school is a consequence of this outlook­
as also its neglect of the unconSClOUS, which on occasions, 1t 
seems, amounts to complete denial. Tius is probably a 
swing of the pendulum-an inevitable reaction to Freud's 
emphasis on the unconscious, which corresponds to the 
natural aversion for it which we have noted in patients 
who are struggling for adaptation and health. For if 
the unconscious is held to be a mere receptacle for all 
the evil shadow-things in human nature, including even 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com52 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
primeval slime-deposits, we really do not see why we should 
still linger on the edge of this swamp into which we once 
fell. The investigator may see in the mud-puddle a world 
full of wonders, but to the ordinaxy man it is something 
upon which he prefers to tum his back. Just as early 
Buddhism recogmzed no gods because it had to free itself 
from an inheritance of nearly two nuihon gods, so must 
psychology, if it is to develop further, renounce so essenttally 
negative an approach to the unCODSCJ.ous as Freud's. 
The Adlerian school, with its educabonal intent, begms 
at the very point where Freud leaves off, and thus helps 
the patient who has learned to see into lumself to .find the 
way to normal hfe It is obviously not enough for hnn to 
know how and why he fell ill, for to understand the causes 
of an evtl does very httle towards cunng 1t We must 
never fmget that the crooked paths of a neurosis lead to 
as many obstinate habits, and that, despite any amount 
of understanding, these do not disappear until they are 
replaced by other habits But habits are only won by 
exefClBe, and appropnate education is the sole means to this 
end. The pabent must be, as it were, prodded mto other 
paths, and this always requires an educatmg will We can 
therefore see why it is that Adler's approach has found 
favour cluefly with clergymen and teachers, whtle Freud's 
school has its advocates among physicians and mtellectuals, 
who one and all are bad nurses knd educators. 
Every stage in our psychic development has something 
pecuharly final about it. When we have expenenced 
catharsis with its wholesale confession we feel that we have 
reached our goal at last ; all has come out, all is known, 
every anxiety has been hved through and every tear shed ; 
now thinp will go as they ought. After the work of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 53 
explanation we are equally persuaded that we now know 
how the neurOSlS arose. The earhest memories have been 
unearthed, the deepest roots dug up ; the transference was 
nothmg but the wish-fulfilhng fantasy of a child's paradise 
or a regression to the old family situatwn ; the way to a 
normally dJ.sill.usioned life is now open. But then comes 
the period of education, which makes us realize that no 
confession and no amount of explaming will make the 
ill-formed tree grow straight, but that 1t must be trained 
with the gardener's art upon the trellis before normal 
adaptation can be attained. 
The curious sense of finality which attends every stage of 
development accounts for the fact that there are people 
using cath3.I'SlS today who have apparently never heard 
of dream mterpretatzon ; Freudm.ns who do not understand 
a word of Adler, and Adlena.ns who do not MSb to hear 
any mention of the unconscious Each is deceived by the 
sense of finality peculiar to the stage of development at which 
he stands, and thIS gives nse to that confusion of opinions and 
views wlnch makes 1t so hard for us to find our beanngs. 
But what causes thIS sense of finality whlch evokes such 
bigoted obstinacy in all directions ;i I can only explain 1t 
to myself on the ground that each stage of development 
1s summed up in a basic truth, and that therefore cases 
frequently recur which demonstrate this truth m a striking 
way. Our world is so exceedmgly nch in delusions that 
a truth is priceless, and no one will let it shp because of 
a few exceptions with which 1t cannot be brought into 
accord. Whoever doubts this truth IS of course looked upon 
as a faithless reprobate, whtle a note of fanaticism and 
intolerance creeps into the discussion on all S1des. 
And yet ea.eh of us can carry the torch of knowledge 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com54 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
but a part of the way, until another takes it from hlm. 
Could we but accept this in an unpersonal way-could we 
but grasp the fact that we are not the personal creators 
of our truths, but only their exponents who thus make 
articulate the psychic needs of our day-theo much of the 
poison and bitterness ntight be spared and we should be 
able to perceive the profound and super-personal cootinuity 
of the human mind. 
We generally take too little account of the fact that the 
doctor who uses catharsis as a mode of treatment is some­
thing more than the embodiment of an abstract idea which 
automa1ically produces nothmg but catharsis. He IS also 
a man His thinking, to be sure, may be linuted to his 
special field, but in his behaviour be exerts the influence of 
a complete human being. Without being clearly conscious 
of 1t or giving it a name, he unwittingly does a great deal in 
the way of explanation and educa.twn , and other analysts 
do as much m the way of catharsis without raisjng it to the 
level of a principle. 
The three stages of analytical psychology so far dealt 
with are by no means of such a nature that the last can 
replace the first or the second. All three qwte properly 
co•exist and are salient aspects of one and the same 
problem ; they no more invahdate each other than do 
confession and absolution. And the same is true of the 
fourth-the stage of transformation · it must not claim to 
be the finally-achieved and only valid truth. Its part is to 
make up a deficit left by the previous stages ; it comes to 
meet an additional and still unsatislied need. 
In order to make clear what this fourth stage has in view, 
and to throw some light oo the curious term " trans­
formation ", we must first take account of those psychic 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 55 
needs of man which were not given a place in the other 
stages In other words, we must ascertam what could 
seem more desirable or lead further than the claim to be 
a normally adapted, social bemg Nothing is more useful 
or fittmg than to be a normal human bemg, but the very 
notion of a " normal human being " suggests a restriction 
to the average-as does also the concept of adaptation. It 
is only a man who, as things stand, already finds it difficult 
to come to terms with the everyday world who can see 
rn t1ns restriction a desirable improvement : a man, let 
us say, whose neurosis unfi.ts him for normal hfe. To be 
'' normal " is a splendid ideal for the unsuccessful, for all 
those who have not yet found an adaptahon. But for 
people who have far more ability than the average, for 
whom it was never hard to gam successes and to accomphsh 
their share of the world's work-for them restnchon to 
the normal sigmfies the bed of Procrustes, unbearable 
boredom, infernal stenhty and hopelessness. As a conse­
quence there are many people who become neurotic because 
they are only nonnal, as there are people who are neurotic 
because they cannot become normal For the former the 
very thought that you want to educate them to normality 
is a mghtmare , their deepest need is really to be able to 
lead " abnormal " lives. 
A man can hope for satisfaction and fulfilment only in 
what he does not yet possess , he cannot find pleasure in 
something of which he has already had too much. To be 
a socially adapted being has no charms for one to whom 
to be so is mere child's play. Always to do what is nght 
becomes a bore for the man who knoVr'S how, whereas the 
eternal bungler cherishes the secret longing to be right for 
once m some distant future. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.coms6 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
The needs and necessities of individuals vary. What sets 
one free is for another a prison-as for instance normality 
and adaptation. Although it is a biological dictum that 
man is a herd ammal and 1S only healthy when he lives as 
a social being, yet the first case we observe may seem to 
upset this statement, and to prove tha.t man is only healthy 
when leading an abnormal and UilSOClBl hfe. It lS a terrible 
misfortune that practical psychology can offer no generally 
vahd recipes and nonns. There are only individual cases 
whose needs and demands are totally different-so dtfferent 
that we really cannot foresee what course a given case will 
follow. It is therefore WISe of the physician to renounce 
all premature assumptwns. This does not mean that he 
should throw all 1us assumptions overboard, but that he 
should regard them in any given case as hypothetical. 
Yet it is not the doctor's whole task to mstruct or convince 
his patient ; he must rather show hun how the doctor 
reacts to hIS particular case. For twist and turn the matter 
as we may, the relation between physician and patient 
remains personal within the frame of the impersonal, 
professional treatment. We cannot by any device bring 1t 
about that the treatment IS not the outcome of a mutual 
influence in which the whole being of the patient as well 
as that of the doctor plays its part. Two primary factors 
come together in the treatment-that is, two persons, 
neither of whom IS a fixed and determmable magnitude. 
Their fields of consciousness may be quite clearly defined, 
but they bring with them besides a.n indefinitely extended 
sphere of unconsciousness. For this reason the personalities 
of the doctor and patieot have olteo more to do with the 
outcome of the treatment than what the doctor says or 
think&-elthough we must not undervalue this latter factor 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 57 
as a disturbing or healing one. The meeting of two per­
sonahties is hke the contact of two chemical substances : 
if there is any reaction, both are transformed. We should 
expect the doctor to have an influence on the patient in 
every effective psychic treatment ; but this influence can 
only take plaoe when he too is affected by the patient 
You can exert no mfluence if you are not susceptible to 
influence. It is futile for the doctor to shield hmiself from 
the mfiuence of the patient and to surround lumself with 
a smoke-screen of fatherly and professional authority If 
he does so he merely forbu:ls himself the use of a highly 
important organ of information, and the patient inftuences 
bun unCOllSClously none the less. The unconscious changes 
in the doctor which the patient thus bnngs about are well 
known to many psychotherapists ; they are disturbances, 
or even mJunes, pecuhar to the profession, which illustrate 
in a striking way the patient's almost " ch.emi.cal " m.fluence 
One of the best known of them is the counter-transference 
which the transference evokes But the effects are often 
more subtle, and then- nature is best conveyed by the old 
tdea of the demon of sickness According to this a sufferer 
transmits lns disease to a healthy person whose powers 
subdue the demon-but not without a negative mfluence 
upon the well-bemg of the healer. 
In the relation between doctor and patient we meet with 
miponderable factors winch bnng about a mutual trans­
formation In tlus exchange, the more stable and the 
stronger penonahty will decide the :final issue. But I have 
seen many cases in which the patient has proved stronger 
than the doctor in defiance of all theory and the doctor's 
intention : and where this has happened 1t has most often. 
though not always, been to the disadvantage of the doctor. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com58 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
The fact of mutual influence and all that goes with it 
underhes the stage of transformation More than a quarter 
of a century of wide pracb.cal experience was needed for 
the clear recognition of these manifestations. Freud lumself 
has admitted their importance and has therefore seconded 
my demand that the analyst himself be analysed. 
But what is the wider meaning of t1us demand ;, It 
means nothmg less than that the doctor " is Just as much 
in analysis " as the patient. He is as much a part of the 
psychic process of the treatment as is the patient, and is 
equally exposed to the transforming influences Indeed, ll 
the doctor is more or less inaccessible to this mfluence, he 
is correspondingly robbed of b1S in1lueru:e over the patlent , 
if he 1S influenced only unconsciously, he shows a defect of 
consciousness w1uch prevents bun from seemg the patient 
correctly. In both cases the result of the treatment is 
compromised. 
The physicia.n, then, is called upon 1wnself to face that 
task which he wishes the patient to face. If 1t IS a question 
of becoming socially adapted, he himself must become so-­
or, in the reverse case, appropnately non-adapted. There 
are of course a thousand different aspects of this reqwrement 
m therapy, according to the mtuatwn in a given case. One 
doctor beheves in overcoming mfantili.sm---and therefore 
he must have overcome his own infantlhsm Another 
believes in the abreaction of all emotion-and so he must 
have abreacted all his own emotions A tlurd beheves in 
complete consciousness-so that he must have reached an 
advanced state of consciousness himself. At all events 
the doctor must cocsistently try to meet h1S own therapeutic 
demands if he wishes to assure lnmself of a proper in1lueru:e 
on his patient. All these guiding principles in therapy 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 59 
confront the doctor with important ethical duties which 
can be summed up in the single rule be the man through 
whom you wish to influence others. Mere talk has always 
been considered hollow, and there is no tnck, however 
cunnmg, by wluch one can evade this simple rule for long 
The fact of bemg convinced, and not the subJect-ma.tter of 
CODV1Ction-it is tlns which has always carried weight 
The fourth stage of analyt,cal psychology, then, demands 
not only the transformation of the patient, but also the 
counter-application to himself by the doctor of the system 
which he prescribes in BllY given case. And m dealmg with 
lumself the doctor must display as much relentlessness, 
consistency and perseverance as m deahng with Ins patients 
To work upon 1umseif wtth an equal concentration is truly 
no small aclnevement ; for he bnngs to bear all the 
attentiveness and critical judgement he can summon 10 
showing lns patients th.e!r mistaken paths, their false con­
clusions and infantlle subterfuges No one pays the doctor 
for lus mtrospective efforts; and moreover, we are generally 
not interested enough in ourselves Again, we so comm.only 
undervalue the deeper aspects of the human psyche that 
we hold self-examination or preoccupation with ourselves 
to be ahnost morbid We evidently suspect ourselves of 
harbounng rather unwholesome things all too renmnscent 
of a sick-room. The physict.an must overcome these 
resistances in hunself, for who can educate others while 
himself uneducated > Who can enlighten his fellows while 
still. in the dark about bunseH, and who can purify if he is 
himself unclean 1 
The step from educating others to self-education is 
demanded of the doctor in the stage of transfonnation. It 
is the corollary of the demand that the patient transform 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com6o PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
himself and thus complete the earlier stages of the treatment. 
ThlS challenge to the doctor to transform himself in order 
to effect a change in the patient meets with scant popular 
approval, for three reasons FII'St of all it seems unpractical, 
secondly, there 18 a prejudice against being occupied with 
OUISe!ves; and tlnr<lly, it is sometimes very painful to make 
omselves hve up to everything that we expect of the pa.bent. 
This last is the strongest reason for the unpopulanty of the 
demand that the doctor examine himself , for if he con­
scientiously " doctors " himseli he will soon discover things 
in his mture which are completely opposed to normalization, 
or which continue to haunt lwn in the most disturbing way 
in spite of exhaustive expla.na.tJ.ons and thorough abreaction. 
What will he do about these things ;i He always knows 
what the patient should do about them-it is 1us professional 
duty to do so. But what will he ID all sincenty do about 
them when they mvolve himself or perhaps those who stand 
nearest to bun 1 If be ex=es hunseli he will discover 
some inferior side which bnngs bun dangerously near to 
Ins patient and perhaps even bbghts his authonty. How 
will he handle this tormenting discovery ? This somewhat 
" neurotic " question will touch lum on the qU1Ck, no matter 
how normal he deems himself to be. He will also discover 
that the ulbmate questions which oppress him as well as lus 
patients cannot be solved by any amount of " treatment ... 
He will let them see that to expect solutions from others is 
a way of reniaining childish ; and be wtll see for himself 
that, if no solutions can be found, these questions must only 
be repressed again. 
l will not discuss further the matter of self-examioation 
and the many problems it raises, because the great obscunty 
which still surrounds our study of the psyche allows of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 6I 
httle interest in them. I would rather emphasize what has 
already been said: that the newest developments of analytical 
psychology confront us with the imponderable elements of 
human personality , that we have learned to place in the 
foreground the personality of the doctor himself as a curative 
or harmful factor ; and that we have begun to demand his 
own transformation-the sell-education of the educator. 
Everything that happened to the patient must now happen 
to the doctor, and he must pass through the stages of 
confess10n, explanation and education so that his personality 
will not react unfavourably on the patient The physiClall 
may no longer shp out of his own d1ffi.culbes by treatmg the 
difficulties of others. He will remember that a man who 
suffers from a runrung abscess is not fit to perform a surgical 
operatwn. 
Just as the cbscovery of the uncoDSClous shadow-side 
once forced the school of Freud to deal even with questions 
of religion, so the latest advance of analytical psychology 
makes an unavmdable problem of the doctor's ethical 
attitude. The self-cnt1C1Sin and self-exammabon demanded 
of htm radically alter our view of the human psyche This 
cannot be grasped from the standpoint of natural SCJ.ence , 
1t IS not only the sufferer but the phySJ.CJaI1 as well ; not 
only the ob1ect but also the sub1ect , not only a function 
of the bram, but the stne qua non of COllSClousness itseli. 
What was formerly a method of mecbca.l treatment now 
becomes a method of self-education, and therewith the 
horizon of our modem psychology IS immeasurably widened. 
The medical chploma is no longer the cruaal thing, but 
human quality instead. ThIS is a sigrulicant step. All the 
implements of psychotherapy developed in clinical piaCtice, 
refined and systematized, are now put at our service and 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com62 PROBLEMS OF MODERN PSYCHOTHERAPY 
can be used for our self-education and self-perfectioning. 
Analytical psychology IS no longer bound to the consulting­
room of the doctor ; its cha.ins have been severed. We 
might say that it transcends itself, and now advances to 
fill that void which lutherto lu1S marked the psyclrlc 
insufficiency of Western culture as compared with that of 
the East. We Oca.dentals had learned to tame and subject 
the psyche, but we knew nothing about its methodical 
development and its functions. Our avilization 1S still 
young, and we therefore required all the devices of the 
ammal-tamer to make the defiant barbarian and the savage 
m us in some measure tractable. But when we reach a 
hlgher cultural level, we must forgo compulsion and tum 
to self-development For tlns we must have knowledge of 
a way or a method-and so far we have known of none 
It seems to me that the findings and experiences of analytical 
psychology can at least provtde a foundation ; for as soon 
as psychotherapy reqmres the self-periectmg of the doctor, 
it is freed from its chm.cal origins and ceases to be a mere 
method for treating the SI.Ck. It is now of service to the 
healthy as well, or at least to those who have a nght to 
psychic health and whose illness IS at most the suffenng 
that tortures us all. For t1ns reason we may hope to see 
analytical psychology become of general US&--more eo even 
than the methods wluch constitute its pre1immary stages 
and which severally carry a general truth But between 
the realization of thlS hope and the actual present there 
lies an abyss over which no bridge is to be found. We have 
yet to build it stone by stone. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comlil 
THE AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
IT 1S generally agreed today that neuroses are functional 
psych.le disturbances and are to be cured by psyclnc methods 
of treatment. But when we come to the questions of the 
formation of the neurosis and of the basic pnnciples of 
therapy, all agreement ends, and we have to acknowledge 
that we have as yet no fully satisfactory conception of the 
nature of the neuroSIS nor of the pnnc1ples of treahneut 
Wlule it 1S true that two trends or schools of thought have 
gamed a special heanng, their teachings by no means exhaust 
the numerous divergent oprmons that have come to be 
expressed in our tlDl.e. There are also many non-partisans 
who, amid the general confhct of opmton, have formulated 
theu- own vt.eWS If, therefore, we sought to paint a com­
prehensive picture of the Situation, we should have to match 
upon our palette the subtle colour-gradations of the rambow. 
I would gladly punt such a picture rl 1t lay in my power, 
for I have always felt the need of comparing the numerous 
viewpoints. I have never succeeded m the long-run m not 
givmg divergent opmions their due. Such op1mons could 
never anse---much less secure a following-if they did not 
correspond to some special disposition, some special character, 
some fundamental psycluc expenence that IS more or less 
prevalent. If we were to exclude such opinions as sunply 
wrong and worthless, we should be reiecting this particular 
63 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com64 AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
disposition or this particular experience as a misinterpretation 
-that is, we should be doing violence to our own empirical 
material. The wide approval winch greeted Freud's ex­
planation of the neuroses in terms of sexual causation, and 
his view that the happenings m the psyche turn essentially 
upon infantile pleasure and its satisfaction, should be 
instructive to the psychologist. It shows him that tlns 
manner of thinlang and feehng comCJdes with a relatively 
widespread tendency or spiritual current wluch, quite apart 
from Freud's theory, has appeared m other places, m other 
circumstances, in various mmds and m different forms I 
should call 1t a manifestabon of the collective psyche. Let 
me point first to the works of Havelock Ellis and Auguste 
Fore! and the contnbutors to Anthropophyteia; also to 
the attitude to sexuality in Anglo-Saxon countnes during 
the post-V1ctonan penod, as well as to the wuiespread 
discussion of sexual matters in general hterature which had 
already set in with the French realists Freud is one of the 
exponents of a present-day psychic prechspoSibon that has 
a special lustory of its own ; but for obvious reasons we 
cannot go into that lustory here. 
The approbation which Adler, no less than Freud, has 
met with on both SJ.des of the ocean, penruts the same 
inference. It is undemable that a great many people find 
satisfaction in explaming their troubles m terms of an urge 
to power arising from a sense of mfenonty. Nor can 1t be 
disputed that thus view accounts for actual psychic happen­
ings which are not given their due m the Freudian system. 
I need hardly mention in detail the forces of the collective 
psyche and the socml factors which underlie the Adlerian 
view and call for precisely this theoretical formulation. 
These matters are sufficiently obvious. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 65 
It would be an unpardonable error to overlook the element 
of truth in both the Freudian and Adlenan viewpoints, but 
it would be no less unpardonable to take either of them as 
the sole truth. Both truths correspond to psychic realities. 
There are actual cases which, m the m.am, are best described 
and explained. by one or other of the two theories. I can 
accuse neither of these investigators of error , on the 
contra,y, I try to apply both hypotheses as far as possible, 
because I fully accept their relative validity. It would 
certainly never have occurred to me to depart from Freud's 
path ii I had not stumbled upon facts whicli forced me to 
mocb.fy lus theory , and the same IS true of my relation to 
the Adlerian vtewpomt It seems hardly necessary to add 
that I hold the truth of my own views to be equally relative, 
and regard myself also as the exponent of a certam pre­
dispoSltion. 
It is in applied psychology, ii anywhere, that today we 
should be modest and grant validity to a number of 
apparently contradictory opmions ; for we are still far from 
having anything hl<e a thorough knowledge of the human 
psyche, that most challenging field of sc1e0tdic enquiry. 
For the present we have merely more or less plausible 
opinions that defy reconciliation When, therefore, I 
undertake to present my views in a general way, I hope I 
shall not be misunderstood. I am not recomm.endmg a 
novel truth ; still less am I heralding an ultimate gospel 
I can speak only of attempts to throw hght upon psychzc 
facts that are obscure to me, or of efforts to overcome 
therapeotic drl!iculties. 
And it is Just with tlus last question that I should like to 
begin, smce 1t JS here that we find the most pressmg need 
for moduica.bons. As is well known, one can get along for 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com66 AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
quite a time with an inadequate theory. but not with in­
adequate therapeutic methods. In my psychotherapeutic 
practice covering nearly tlurty years, I have met with 
a fair number of failures which were far more impres­
mve to me, than my successes. Almost anybody, from 
the pnmihve medicine-man and the prayer-healer up, 
can gain successes in psychotherapy. But the psycho­
therapist learns httle or nothing from !us successes. They 
mainly con.firm 1nm in his mistakes, whtle his fa.tlures, on 
the other hand, are pnceless expenences m that they not 
only open up the way to a deeper truth, but force bun to 
change his views and methods. 
I certainly recognize how much my work has been furthered 
first by Freud and then by Adler ; and whenever poss1ble 
I apply their standpoints to my prac1lca.l treatment of 
patients. Nevertheless I insist upon the fact that I have 
met with failures wluch I feel could have been avmded had 
I taken into consideration those empirical data which later 
forced me mto modifications of theU' views It is unpos&ble 
to describe all the situations with which I was confronted, 
and I must content myself with smghng out a few typical 
cases. It was with older patients that I had the greatest 
difliculties-that is, with persons over forty. In handlmg 
younger people I generally find the familiar viewpmnts of 
Freud and Adler apphcable enough, for they offer a treat­
ment wluch brings the patient to a certain level of adaptation 
and normahty, apparently without leaving any chsturbing 
alter-effects. With older people, according to my experieoce, 
this is often not the case. It seems to me that the elements 
of the psyche undergo in the course of life a very marked 
cha.ng&-oo much so, that we may distinguish between a 
psychology of the morning of life and a psychology of its 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 67 
afternoon. As a rule. the life of a young person is chara.c­
tenzed by a general unfolding and a strivmg toward concrete 
ends ; lus neUI'OSlS, if he develops one, can be traced to his 
hesitation or his shrinking back from this necessity. But 
the life of an older person lS marked by a contraction of 
forces, by the affirmation of what has been achieved, and 
the curtailment of further growth. His neurosis comes 
mainly from !us clinging to a youthful attitude wluch is 
now out of season Just as the youthful neurotic is afraid 
of hfe, so the older one shrinks back from death. What was 
a normal goal for the young man, inevitably becomes a 
neurotic hmdrance to the older person In the case of the 
young neurotic:, what was once a normal dependence on his 
parents mevitably becomes, through his hesitation to face 
the world, an incest-relation which is irumical to hfe. It 
must be remembered that, despite all s:unilar.i.tl.es, res1Stance, 
repression, transference, " guuhng fictions " and so forth, 
have one meamng when we find them in young people, 
whtle m older persons they have qU1te another. The auns 
of therapy should uodoubtedly be modrlied to meet tlus 
fact The age of the patient seems to me, therefore, a 
most 1mportant 1-nd1e1um. 
But there are also vanous indwia which we should note 
withm the penod of youth itself Thus, according to my 
view, 1t is a blunder m tecbmque to treat from the Freudian 
standpoint a patient of the type to whom the Adlerian 
psychology apphes, that is, an unsuccessful peraon wtth an 
mfantile need for self-assertion. Conversely, it would be a 
gross error to force the Adlenan viewpoint upon a successful 
man whose motives can be understood in terms of the 
pleasure principle. In doubtful cases the resistances of the 
patient may serve as valuable signposts. I am inclined at 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com68 AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
the start to take cleep-sested resistances seriously, strange 
as this may sound. For I am convinced thst the doctor 
is not necessarily in a better position to know what is wanted 
than is the patient's own psychic constitution, which may 
be quite WlCOIIScious to the patrent himself. This modesty 
on the part of the doctor is altogether appropriate in view 
of the situation today Not only have we as yet no generally 
valid psychology, but what is more, the vanety of psychic 
conshtutions IS untold, and there also exist more or less 
individual psyches which refuse to fit into any general 
scheme. 
As to this question of psychic constitution, 1t IS well 
known thst I postulate two diflereot baSlc attitudes in 
accordance with the typical dJflerences already suspected 
by many students of human nature-the extravertcd and 
the introverted atbtudes These attitudes also I take to 
be important ,nd,e,a, as likewise the predominance of 
a particular psychic function over other luru:bons. The 
great variability of individual hfe necessitates constant 
modifications of theory which are often applied by the 
doctor quite unconsciously, but which m principle do not 
at all coincide with his theoretical creed. 
While we are on this question of psychic constitution, I 
must not fall to point out that there are some people whose 
attitude is essentially spintual and others whose attitude 
is essentially materialistic. It must not be assumed that 
such an attitude is accidentally acquired or spnngs from 
some misunderstanding. These attitudes show them.selves 
as ingrained passions which DO criticism or penuasion can 
stamp out ; there are even cases where an apparently 
outspoken materialism has its source in the denial of a 
religious disposition. Cues of the reverse type are better 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 6g 
known today, although they are not more frequent than the 
others. These attitudes also are tttdwu which. m my 
opimon, ought not to be overlooked. 
When we use the word ffltlscium it might appear to mean, 
as in medical parlance generally, that this or that treatment 
is inchca.ted.. Perhaps this should be the case, but psycho­
therapy has assuredly readied no such degree of certainty 
-for which reason our iflllscsa are unfortunately not much 
more than mere wammgs against one-Sldedness. 
The human psyche IS lughly eqmvocal In every single 
case we must consider the question whether an attitude or 
a so-called lusbdus exists in its own right, or is perhaps only 
a compensation for the opposite. I must confess that I 
have so often been mistaken m this matter, that m any 
concrete case I am at pams to avoul all theoreucal pre­
supposibons as to the structure of the neurosJS and as to 
what the pat1.e11t can and ought to do. As far as poss1ble, 
I let pure experience decuie the therapeutic aim.s This 
may perhaps seem strange, because it is usually assumed 
that the theraplSt should have an aun But it seems to 
me that m psychotherapy especially 1t IS advisable for the 
phyS1C1an not to have too fixed a goal He can scarcely 
know what is wanted better than do nature and the wtll-to­
hve of the S1Ck person. The great decisions of human We 
have as a rule far more to do with the mstincts and other 
mysterious unconscious factors than with conscious will and 
well-meamng reasonableness The shoe that fits one person 
pinches another , there is no recipe for hving that suits 
all cases, Each of us carries bts own life-form-an m­
determinable fotm which cannot be superseded by any 
other. 
None of these considerations, of course, prevents our 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com7" AIJ45 OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
doing everything pos511,Je to make the lives of patients 
normal and reasonable. If this bnngs about a satisfactory 
result, then we can let it go at that ; but if it is insufficient, 
then, for better or for worse, the therapist must be guided 
by the data presented through the patient's llnCOllSClOUS. 
Here we must follow nature as a guide, and the course the 
physician then adopts is less a question of treatment than of 
developing the creative possibilities that lie in the patient 
himself. 
What I have to say begins with the point where treatment 
ceases and development sets in. My contnbution to psycho­
therapy is confined to those cases in which rati.onal treatment 
yields no satisfactory results. The clinical matenal at my 
disposal JS of a special nature : new cases are d.ecJ.dedly m 
the minority. Most of my patients have already gone 
through some form of psychotherapeutic treatment, usually 
with partial or negative results About a tlnrd of my cases 
are suffering from no clinically definable neurOSlS, but from 
the senselessness and emptiness of thelI' hves It seems to 
me, however, that this can well be descnbed as the general 
neurosis of our tlDle. Fully two-tlurds of my patients have 
passed middle age 
It is ddlicult to treat patients of this particular kind by 
rational methods, because they are in the mam socially 
well-adapted mdividuals of considerable ability, to whom 
normalization means nothing. As for so-called normal 
people, I am even worse off m their regard, for I have no 
ready-made lile-plnlosophy to hand out to them. In the 
majority of my cases, the resources of consciousness have 
been exhausted ; the ordinary expression for this situation 
is : " I am stuck." It is chiefly this fact that forces me to 
look for hidden possibilities. For I do not koow what to 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 7x 
say to the patient when he asks me : " What do you advise 1 
What shall I do ? " I do not know any better than he. I 
know only one thmg · that when to my COllSClous outlook 
there is no pOSSLble way of going ahead, and I am therefore 
" stuck ", my unconscious will react to the unbearable 
standstill. 
This commg to a standstill is a psychic OCCUITeDce so 
often repeated in the evolution of mankind, that it has become 
the theme of many a fa.uy-tale and myth. We are told of 
the Open Sesame to the locked door, or of some helpful 
arumal who finds the hidden way We might put 1t in this 
way : " gettmg stuck " lS a typical event which, m the course 
of tune, has evoked typical reactions and compensations. 
We may therefore expect With a certain degree of probability 
that somethmg Slillllar will appear in the reactions of the 
uncoI1SC1ous, as, for exam.pie, m dreams. 
In such cases, therefore, my attention is chrected more 
particularly to dreams. ThJ.S is not because I am tied to the 
notion that dreams must always be called to the rescue, or 
because I possess a mystenous dream-theory whr.ch tells me 
how everything must shape itself , but quite Sllllply from 
perplexity. I do not know where else to go for help, and so 
I try to find 1t m dreams ; these at least present us with 
images pointing to something or other, and that IS at any 
rate better than nothing. I have no theory about dreams , 
I do not know how dreams anse. I am altogether in doubt 
as to whether my way of bandhng dreams even deserves 
the mune of " method ". 
I share all my readers' prejudices against dream inter­
pretation as being the quintessence of uncertainty and 
arbitrariness. But. on the other hand, I know that if we 
meditate on a dream sufficiently long and thoroughly-if 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com72 AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
we take it about with us and turn it over and over--some­
thing almost always comes of it. This something is of COUISe 
not of such a .kmd that we can boast of its scientuic nature 
or rationahze 1t. but it IS a practlcal and important hint 
wluch shows the patient in what direction the unconscious 
is leading bun. I even may not give first importance to the 
question whether our study of the dream gives a scientifically 
verifiable result , if I do this, I am following an exclusively 
personal aim, and one winch is therefore auto-erotic I 
must content myself with the fact that the result means 
something to the patient and sets Ins We into motion again. 
I may allow myself only ono cntenon for the valuhty of my 
interpretation of the dream-and tlus IS that 1t works. As 
for my scientmc hobby-my desire to know why it is that 
the dream works-tlns I must reserve for my spare tune. 
The contents of the imtial dreams are infimtely varied.­
I mean those dreams winch the patient relates to me at the 
beguming of the treatment. In many cases they pomt 
directly to the past and bnng to mmd what is forgotten and 
lost to the personality It ,. from these very losses that 
one-sidedness results, and this causes the standstill and 
consequent chsonentabon. In psychologlcal terms, one­
suledness may lead to a sudden loss of hb1do. All our 
previous activities become uninteresting, even senseless, and 
the goals towards which we strove lose their value. What 
in one person is merely a passing mood may m another 
become a chronic condition. In these cases it often happens 
that other possibilibes of development of the personahty 
lie somewhere or other m the past. and no one, not even the 
pa-t. knows about them. But the dream may reveal the 
clue. In other cases the dream points to present facts, as 
for example marriage or soaa1 posibon, wluch !15ve never 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 73 
been cODSClOUSly accepted as sources of problems and 
confhcts. 
These possibilities fall within the scope of rational explana­
tion, and it is not difficult to make such imtial dreams 
plaUS1ble. The real difficulty begins when dreams, as is 
ofteo the case, do not point to anythmg tangible---e;peaally 
when they show a land of foreknowledge of the future. I do 
not mean that such dreams are necessanly prophetic, but 
that they anUCJ.pate or " reconn01tre ". Such dreams 
contain mkhngs of poss1btht1.es, and therefore can never be 
made plaUSlble to an outsu:ler. They are often not plaUSJ.ble 
even to me, and then I say to my patients • " I don't beheve 
it, but follow up the clue" As I have said, the stunulating 
effect IS the sole cntenon, and 1t 1S by no means necessary 
that we should understand why such an effect takes place 
Tlus lS especially true of dreams contauung mythological 
unages which are sometunes 1ncredlbly strange and baflhng. 
These dreams contain sometlnng hke " uncoilSCloUS meta­
physics " , they are expressions of undifferentiated psychic 
act1v1ty wluch may often contain the germs of conscious 
thought.l 
In a long imtial dream of one of my " normal " patients, 
the illness of h!S S1Ster"s cluld played an important part. She 
was a httle girl of two. Some tune before, tlus sister really 
had lost a boy through illness, but otherwise none of her 
children were ill. The miage of the sick child 10 the dream 
at first proved baffling to bun-undoubtedly because 1t m 
no way :fitted m with the facts Since there was no direct 
and close connection between the dreamer and his sister he 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com74 AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
could find in this image httle that was personal to him. Then 
suddenly it occurred to him that two years earlier he had 
taken up the study of occultism, and that 1t was thJS which 
had led him to psychology. The child was evidently his 
interest m the things of the psyche, an idea wluch I should 
never have lnt upon of my own accord. Looked at from 
the mde of theory, this dream-unage can mean anythmg or 
nothing For that matter, does a thing or a fact ever mean 
anything in and of itself;, We can only be sure that 1t is 
always the human bemg who interprets, that JS, gives 
meamng to a fact. And that is the gist of the matter for 
psychology. It impressed the dreamer as a new and mterest­
ing idea that the study of occultism nught have something 
sickly about it Somehow the thought struck home And 
tlus is the decISlve pomt · the mterpreta"bon UJOrks, however 
we may elect to account for its workmg For the dreamer 
this thought contamed a cnllcJSm, and through 1t a certam 
change In atb.tude was brought about. By such shght 
changes, which one could never think out rationally, thmgs 
begin to move and the dead point is overcome 
In commentmg upon t1ns example I could say in a figure 
of speech that the dream meant that the occult studies of 
the dreamer had something sickly about them. And in 
tins sense I may also speak of .. unconscious metaphysics ". 
if the dreamer is brought by !us dream to thlS very thought. 
But I go still forther; I not only give the patient an oppor­
tlmity to see what occurs to bun m connection WJ.th his 
dream, but I allow myself to do the same. I give him the 
benefit of my guesses and opinions. If, in doing this I 
should open the door to so-called .. suggestion ", I see no 
occasion for regret ; it is well known that we are susceptible 
only to those suggestions with which we are already secretly 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 75 
in accord. No harm. IS done if now and then one goes astray 
m tlus riddle-readmg. Sooner or later the psyche reiects 
the nustake, much as an organism does a foreign body 
I need not try to prove that my dream mte,pretation is 
correct, which would be a somewhat hopeless undertaking, 
but must sunply help the patient to find what 1t is that 
activates htm-1 was almost betrayed into say.mg what is 
actual. 
It is of especial importance for me to know as much as 
JlOSSlble about pnmitive psychology, mythology, archa!ology 
and comparative rehgion, for the reason that these fields 
afford me priceless analogies with wlnch I can enrich the 
associations of my patients Workmg together, we are then 
able to find the apparently irrelevant full of meaning and 
vastly increase the effectiveness of the dream Thus to 
enter a realm of immediate experience is most stimulahng 
for those who have done their utmost in the personal and 
rational spheres of hfe and yet have found no m.eamng and 
no satisfaction there. In this way. too, the m.a.tter--0f-fact 
and the commonplace come to wear an altered countenance, 
and can even acquire a new glamour For it all depends 
on how we look at things, and not on how they are m them­
selves. The least of things with a meaning 1s worth more in 
life than the greatest of things without 1t. 
I do not think that I underestimate the risk of this under­
talang. It is as if one began to bwld a bndge out into space. 
Indeed, one might even allege-as has often been done-that 
m followmg tlus procedure the doctor and !us patient are 
both together mdulging m mere fantasies. And I do not 
consider this an objectwn, but quite to the point. I even 
make an effort to second the patient in his fantasies. Truth 
to tell, I have a very high opiru.on of fantasy. To me, it is 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com7fi AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
actually the matemally creative side of the masculine spirit. 
When all is said and done, we are never proof agamst fantasy. 
It is true that there are worthless, madequate, morbid and 
unsatisfymg fantasies whose sterile nature will be quickly 
recognized by every person endowed with common-sense ; 
but this of course proves nothing against the value of crea.t:J.ve 
imagjnation. All the works of man have their origin in 
creahve fantasy. What nght have we then to depreciate 
imagmation ;i In the ordinary course of tlnngs, fantasy does 
not easily go astray ; ,t IS too deep for thst, and too closely 
bound up with the tap-root of human and animal mstmct. 
In surpnsmg ways 1t always nghts itself again The creative 
activity of the imagmation frees man from h1S bondage to 
the " nothmg but" and hberates 10 lum the spirit of play. 
As Schiller says, man is completely human only when he IS 
playmg. 
My aim is to bring about a psychic state m wluch my 
patient begins to experiment with Ins own nature-a state 
of :fluidity, change and growth, in which there 1s no longer 
anytlung etemally fixed and hopelesaly petnfied. It IS of 
course only by statmg its general pnnciples that I can 
present my techmque here. In handling a dream or a 
fantasy I make 1t a rule never to go beyond the meaning 
which has an effect upon the patient ; I merely strive in 
each case to make tins meaning as conscious to him as 
poss1ble, so that he can also become aware of its supra­
peISOllal connections. Tius IS important, for when some­
thing quite universal happens to a man and he supposes it 
to be an experience peculiar to hlmself, then Ins attitude 
is obviously wrong, thst is, too personal, and it tends to 
exclude bun from human society. We reqwre not only a 
present-day, personal cODSCiousness, but also a supra-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 77 
personal consciousness which is open to the sense of lustoncal 
continuity. However far-fetched 1t may sound, expenence 
shows that many neuroses are caused by the fact that people 
blind themselves to their own reh.gi.ous promptmgs because 
of a chtldJ.sh passion for rational enhghtenment. The 
psychologist of today ought to rea.b.ze once and for all that 
we are no longer deahng Wlth questions of dogma and creed 
A rehgious attitude is an element m psychic hfe whose 
importance can hardly be overrated. And 1t is precisely 
for the rehgious outlook that the sense of historical contmuity 
is indispensable. 
To return to the quest10n of my technique, I ask myself 
to what extent I am mdebted to Freud In any case I 
learned 1t from Freud's method of free assocmtion, and I 
regard my techruque as a further development of this 
method. 
As long as I help the patient to discover the effective 
elements in his dream, and as long as I try to show him the 
general mearung of Ins symbols, he ts still, psychologically 
spea.kmg, m a state of childhood For the time bemg he 
depends on hIS dreams and is always askmg hunself whether 
the subsequent dream will give htm new hght or not More­
over, he is dependent on my havmg ideas about his dreams 
and on my ability to mcrease lus ms1ght through my know­
ledge Thus he is still m an undesirably passive condition 
in which everythmg is uncertain and questionable; neither 
he nor I know the Journey's end. Often it is not much more 
than a groping about in Egyptian darkness. In t1ns condition 
we must not expect any very marked effects, for the un­
certamty is too great. Moreover we constantly run the 
risk that what we have woven by day, the night will unravel. 
The danger 1s that nothing comes to pass ; that notlung 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com78 AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
keeps its shape. It not infrequently happens in these 
circumstances that the patient has an espec,ally colourful 
or curious dream, and says to me: "Do you know, ii only 
I were a painter I would make a picture of it " Or the 
dreams treat of photographs, of paintings, drawings or 
illuminated manuscripts, or perhaps of the fihns. 
I have turned these hints to prachcal account, and I now 
urge my patients at such tunes actually to paint what they 
have seen in dream or fantasy As a rule, I am met with 
the ob]ection: "I am not a painter." To thts I usually 
reply that neither are modem pamters-for which very 
reason modem painting is absolutely free-----and that it is 
anyhow not a question of the beautiful, but merely of the 
trouble one takes with the picture How httle my way of 
painting has to do with " art " I saw recently m the case of 
a talented portraitist ; she had to hegm all ewer agam with 
pitiably cluldish eliort&-hterally as If she had never 
had a brush in her hand. To pamt what we see before 
us is a ch:fferent matter from paintmg what we see 
within. 
Many of my more advanced patients, then, begin to pamt. 
I can well understand that everyone will consider tlus as an 
utterly futtle sort of dtlettantism However, it must be 
remembered that we are speaking not of people who have 
still to prove their s0C18l usefulness, but of those who can 
no longer find signifi.cance in their value to society, and who 
have come upon the deeper and more dangerous quesb.on of 
the meaning of their inchvidual hves. To be a particle in a 
mass has meaning and charm. only for the man who has not 
yet advanced to that stage, but none for the man who has 
experienced it to sa:b.ety. The importance of individual hfe 
may always be demed by the " educator " whose pride it is 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 79 
to breed mass-men. But any other person will sooner or 
later be driven to find this meaning for himself. 
Although from tnne to time my patients produce artistic­
ally beautiful creations which might very well be shown 
in modem " art " exhlb1bons, I nevertheless treat them as 
wholly worthless according to the tests of senous art. It is 
even essential that no such value be allowed them, for 
otherwise my patients might unagine themselves to be 
arlJ.sts, and this would spoil the good effects of the exercise. 
It is not a question of art---or rather 1t should not be a 
question of art-but of somethmg more, something other 
than mere art · namely the hvmg effect upon the patient 
himseli. The meamng of mdividuaJ life, whose rmportance 
from the soc1al standpomt is negligible, 1S here accorded the 
highest value, and for 1ts sake the patient struggles to give 
form, however crude and chtldtsh, to the mexpressible 
But why do I encourage patients to express themselves 
at a certain stage of development by means of brush, pencil 
or pen 1 My purpose 1s the same here as m my handhng of 
dreams : I wish to produce an effect In the childish con­
dit10n descnbed above, the patient remains in a passive 
state, but now he begins to play an active part. At first 
he puts on paper what has come to him in fantasy, and there­
by gives it the status of a deliberate act He not only talks 
about it, but he 1s actually doing something about 1t Psycho­
logically speakmg, it 1S one thmg for a person to have an 
interesting conversation with hlS doctor twice a week-the 
results of which hang somewhere or other in mid-air-and 
quite another thing to struggle for hours at a time with 
refractory brush and colours, and to produce in the end 
something which, at its face value, 1s perfectly senseless 
Were his fantasy really senseless to lrun, the effort to paint 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com8o AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
It would be so irksome that he could scarcely be brought 
to perform this exercise a second tJm.e But smce his 
fantasy does not seem to him entirely senseless, his busying 
himself with it increases its effect upon him. Moreover, the 
effort to give visible fonn to the unage enforces a study of 1t 
in all its parts. so that in this way its effects can be com­
pletely experienced. The chsciphne of drawing endows the 
fantasy with an element of reality, thus lending 1t greater 
weight and greater driving power. And actually these 
crude pictures do produce effects which, I must admit, are 
rather difficult to describe When a pa-b.ent has seen once 
or twice how he is freed from a wretched state of mind by 
working at a symbolical picture, he will thenceforward turn 
to this means of release whenever thmgs go badly with him. 
Jn tins way somethmg invaluable is won, namely a growth 
of independence, a step towards psychological matunty. The 
patieot can make lumself creatively indepeodent by tins 
method-if I may call 1t such. He is no looger dependeot 
on his dreams or on lus doctor's knowledge, but can give 
fonn to his own inner expenence by painting 1t. For what 
he paints are active fantasies-rt is that which activates 
him. And that winch lS active within lS lnmself, but not 
in the sense of his previous error when he mistook Ins 
personal ego for the self; it is himself in a new sense, for 
his ego now appears as an obJect actuated by the life-forces 
within. He strives to represent as fully as poss1ble in his 
plcture--series that which works witbm him, only to discover 
in the end that it is the eternally unknown and alien-the 
hidden fouodations of psychic liie. 
I cannot possibly p,cture to you the extent to which these 
discoveries chang,, a patumt's standpoint and values, and 
how they shift. the centre of gravity of the personality. It 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 81 
is as though the ego were the earth, and it suddenly dis­
covered that the sun (or the self) was the centre of the 
planetary orbits and of the earth's orbit as well. 
But have we not always known all tlns to be so ? I myself 
beheve that we have always known 1t. But I may know 
about something with my head whlch the other man in me 
is far from knowmg, and I may in fact live as though I did 
not know it Most of my patients knew the deeper troth, 
but did not live it And why did they not hve 1t ? Because 
of that bias which makes us all put the ego m the centre of 
our hves-and this bias comes from the over-valuation of 
consciousness 
It is lughly important for a young person who is still 
unadapted and has as yet achieved nothing, to shape the 
conscious ego as effechvely as possible-that is, to educate 
the will. Unless he IS positively a genius he even may not 
believe m anythmg active withm himself that is not identical 
with lus will He must feel lumself a man of will, and he 
may safely depreciate everything else withm hunself OI 
suppose it subject to lns will-for without this tllUS1on he can 
scarcely bring about a socutl adaptatwn. 
It 18 otherwise with the patient m the second half of hfe 
who no longer needs to educate his conscious will, but who, 
to understand the meaning of his individual life, must learn 
to experience his own inner being. Social usefulness is no 
longer an aim for him, although he does not question 1ts 
desirability. Fully aware as he is of the SOCJ.al unimportance 
of his creative activity, he looks upon it as a way of working 
out his own development and thus beoefiting bimself. This 
activity likewise frees him progressively from a mo,bid 
dependence, and he thus wins an mner firmness and a new 
trust in himself. These last achievements in tum serve to 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com82 All!S OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
further the patient in his social existence For an inwardly 
sound and self-confident person will be more adequate to his 
social tasks than one who is not on good terms with hts 
unconscious 
I have purposely avoided weighting down my essay with 
theory, for which reason many thmgs must remain obscure 
and unexplained. But m order to make intelligible the 
pictures produced by my patients, certa.J.n theoretical points 
must at least be mentioned. A feature common to all these 
pictures is a primitive symbolism which is conspicuous both 
in the drawing and in the colounng The colours are usually 
quite barbanc ID their mtenS1ty ; often, too, an archaic 
quality JS present. These pecuharities pomt to the nature 
of the creatJ.ve forces which have produced the pictures 
They are non-rational, symbohstic currents in the evolution 
of man, and are so archaic that 1t is easy to draw parallels 
between them and sunilar manifestations m the fields of 
1m:Jueology and comparative rehg,on. We may therefore 
readily assame that these pictures originate chiefly in that 
realm of psychic hfe which I have called the collective 
unconSCious By t1ns term I designate an unconsaous 
psychic actiV1ty present in all human bemgs winch not only 
gives nse to symbolical pictures today, but was the source 
of all similar products of the past. Such pictures spring 
from-<llld satisfy-a natUial need. It is as if, through these 
pictures, we bnng to expression that part of the psyche 
winch reaches back into the primitive past and reconcile 1t 
with present-day conSC1ousness, thus mit,gating its disturbing 
effects upon the latter. 
It is true, I must add, that the mere execution of the 
pictures is not all that is required. It is necessary besides to 
have an intellectual and emotional understanding of them ; 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comAIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 83 
they must be consaously integrated, made intelligible, and 
morally assinulated. We must subject them to a process of 
interpretation. But despite the fact that I have so often 
travelled tlns path with individual patients. I have not yet 
succeeded in making the process clear to a wider circle 
and in working it np m a fonn swtable for publication 
This has so far been acc0111plished only in a fragmentary 
way 
The truth is, we are here on perfectly new ground, and 
a npening of experience 15 the first requisite For very 
unportant reasons I should like to avoid over-hasty con­
clusions We are deahng with a region of psychic life 
outside consciousness, and our way of observing it is indirect. 
As yet we do not know what depths we are trying to plumb 
As I indicated above, it seems to me to be a question of 
some kind of centring process, for many pictures wluch 
pahents feel to be decisive pomt in thts direction It IS a 
process which bnngs mto being a new centre of eqw.hbnum, 
and it is as if the ego turned in an orbit round it. What 
the aim of this process may be remains at first obscure. 
We can only remark its important effect upon the conscious 
personahty. From the fact that the change heightens the 
feeling for life and maintains the flow of hfe, we must 
conclude that a pecuhar purposefulness is mherent in it. 
We might perhaps call this a new il1US1on-but what is 
illusion ? By what cntenon do we Judge something to be 
an illUS1on ;i Does there exist for the psyche anything 
which we may call " illusion " ;i What we are pleased to 
call such may be for the psyche a most important factor of 
life-something as indispensable as oxygen fortheorganism­
a psychic actuality of prime importance. Presumably the 
psyche does not trouble itself about our categories of reality, 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com84 AIMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY 
and it would therefore be the better part of wtsdom for us 
to say : everything that •cls ,s actual. 
He who would fathom the psyche must not confuse 1t 
with consciousness, else he veils from h,s owo sight the 
obJect he wishes to explore. On the contrary, to recogni,,e 
the psyche, even, he must learn to see how it differs from 
consciousness. It is highly probable that what we call 
illusion is actual for the psyche · for winch reason we canoot 
take psyclw: actuality to be commensurable with COJISCIOUS 
actuality. To the psychologist there is nothing more stupid 
than the standpoint of the missionary who pronounces the 
gods of the " poor heathen " to be illusiorJS. But unfor­
tunately we keep blundenng along in the same dogmatic 
way, as If what we call the real were not equally full of 
illusion. In psychic life, as everywhere 1n our experience, 
all things that act are actual, regardless of the names man 
chooses to bestow on them. To understand that these 
happenings have actuahty-that is what is important to 
us ; and not the attempt to give them one name mstead 
of another. To the psyche the spirit is no less the spirit 
even though it be called sexuahty. 
I must repeat that the vanous technical terms and the 
changes rung upon them never touch the essence of the 
process described above. It cannot be compassed by the 
rational concepts of consc10usness any more than life itseH. 
It is because they feel the whole force of this truth that 
my patients turn to symbolical expressu>n. In the repre­
sentation and interpretation of symbols they find something 
more etlective and adequate to their needs than ratlonal 
expla.natiorJS. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comIV 
A PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
CHARACTER is the fixed mcliVldual form of a human being 
Smee there is a form of body as well as of behaviour or 
mmd, a general characterology must teach the SJgnifi.cance 
of both physical and psycbic features. The enigmatic 
oneness of the hvmg bemg has as its necessary corollary 
the fact that bodily traits are not merely physical, nor 
mental tnuts merely psyclnc. The contm111ty of nature 
knows nothing of those antithetical distinctions which the 
human intellect IS forced to set up as helps to understanding. 
The distinctJ.on between mind and body is an artrlicial 
dichotomy, a discnnunatJ.On wluch is unquestionably based 
far more on the pecuhanty of intellectual understanding 
than on the nature of things. In fact, so intimate is the 
intemunghng of bodily and psycbic traits that not only 
can we draw far-reaching inferences as to the constitution 
of the psyche from the conshtut10n of the body, but we can 
also Infer from psychic pecuhantles the com,spooding bodily 
characteristics. It is true that the latter process IS more 
difficult ; but this is surely not because there is a greater 
mfluence of the body over the mind than mce versc, but for 
quite another reason. In taking the mind as our starting­
point we work our way from the relatively unknown to the 
known ; while in the opposite case we have the advantage of 
starting from something known, that is, from the VISible 
85 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com86 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
body. Despite all the psychology we thmk we possess 
today. the psyche is still infinitely more obscure to us than 
the V1S1ble surface of the body. The psyche 19 still a fOl'elgD., 
almost unexplored country of winch we have only indirect 
knowledge , it is mechated by conscious functions that are 
subject to almost endless possibilities of deception. 
This being so, 1t appears safer for us to proceed from the 
outer world inward, from the known to the unknown, from 
the body to the mind. Therefore all attempts at charac­
terology have started from the outside world, astrology, 
in ancient tunes, turned even to stellar space m order to 
determine those hnes of fate whose beginnmgs are contained 
in man hunseli. To the same class of interpretations from 
ootward signs beloog pahrustry, Gall's phreoology, Lavater's 
stody of physiognomy, and more recently, graphology, 
Kretschmer's physwlogical study of types and Rorshacb's 
klexographic method. As we can see, there are any number 
of paths lea.ding from without mward, from the physical 
to the psychic, and 1t is necessary that research should follow 
this directton until certain elementary psychic facts are 
estabhshed with su.ffi.Clellt certainty But once having 
estabhshed these facts, we can reverse the procedure We 
can then put the question : What are the bodtly correlatives 
of a given psychlc condition ? Unfortunately we are not 
yet far enough advanced to answer this question even 
roughly. The first requirement is to establish the primary 
facts of psychic hfe, and this has by· no means as yet been 
accomplished. Indeed, we have ooly just begun the work 
of compiling an invento,;y of the p.,ycbe, and our results 
have not always been successful. 
Merely to estabhsh the fact that certain people have this 
or that appearance is of no significance Jf it does not allow 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 87 
us to infer a psycllic correlahve. We have learned something 
only when we have determined what mental attnbutes go 
with a given bodily constitution. The body means as little 
to us without the psyche as the latter without the body. 
When we try to denve a psycluc correlative from a physical 
characteristic, we are proceeding-i!.S already stated-from 
the known to the unknown 
I must, unfortunately, stress this point, since psychology 
is the youngest of all the sciences, and therefore the one 
that suffers most from preconceived opunons. The fact 
that we have only recently chscovered psychology shows 
plainly enough that 1t has taken us all this hme to make 
a clear distinction between ourselves and the contents of 
our minds Until this could be done, 1t was impossible to 
study the psyche ob1ectively. Psychology, as a natural 
SCJ.ence, is actually our most recent acqmsition ; up to 
now it has been just as fantastic and arbitrary as was 
natural science m the Middle Ages. Heretofore it has been 
thought that psychology could dispense with empmcal data 
and be created as 1t were by decree-a pre1udice under 
which we are still labouring. Yet the events of psychic 
life are what is most 1DUDediate to us, and apparently what 
we know most about. Indeed, they are more than familiar 
to us, we yawn over them We are amazed at the banahty 
of these everlastmg commonpla.ces ; m short, we actually 
suffer under the immediacy of our psychic hfe and do 
everything in our power to avoid thinkmg about it. The 
psyche, then, being unmediacy itself, and we norselves 
being the psyche, we are almost forced to assume that we 
know 1t through and through in a way that cannot be 
questioned. Tlus is why each of us has his own private 
opinion about psychology and is even convinced that he 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com88 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
knows more about it than anyone else. Psychiatrists, 
because they must struggle with their patients' families and 
guardians whose " understanding " is proverbial, are 
perhaps the first as a professional group to become aware 
of that blind prejudice which encourages every man to 
take himself as his own best authority m psychological 
matters. But this of course does not prevent the psychiatrist 
also from becoming a " know-all ". One of them went so 
far as to confess : " There are only two nonnal people in 
this city-Professor B is the other." 
Since this is how matters stand in psychology today, we 
must adnut that what is closest to us is the very thing we 
know least about, although it seems to be what we know 
best of all Furthermore, we must admit that everyone else 
probably understands us better than we do ourselves. At 
any rate, as a starting-point, this would be a most useful 
heunstlc pnnciple As I have said, it is just because the 
psyche is so close to us that psychology has been discovered 
so late. Being still in its initial stages as a science, we lack 
the concepts and defimbons with which to grasp the facts. 
If concepts are la.eking to us, facts are not ; on the contrary 
we are surrounded-almost buned-by these facts Tins 
IS a stnking contrast to the state of affairs in other sciences 
where the facts have first to be unearthed. Here the 
classifi.cation of primary data results in the fonnation of 
descnptive concepts covering certam natural orders, as, for 
example, the grouping of the elements m chemistry and of 
genera in botany. But it is quite different in the case of 
the psyche. Here an empirical and descriptive standpoint 
leaves us at the mercy of the unchecked stream of our own 
subjective experiences, so that whenever any sort of inclusive 
gene:raliation emerges from this welter of impresSions, it 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 8g 
is usually nothing more than a symptom Because we 
ourselves are psyches, it is almost imposs1ble for us to give 
free rein to psychic happenings without being practically 
dissolved m them and thus robbed of our ability to recogni,.e 
distinctions and to make comparisons 
This is one difficulty The other lies in the circumstance 
that the more we tum from special phenomtma. and come to 
deal with the spaceless psyche, the more impossible it 
becomes to detenmne anything by exact measurement It 
becomes drllicult even to establish facts If, for example, 
I want to emphasize the unreahty of something, I say that 
I merely thought it. I say : " I would never even have 
had thts thought unless so-aod-so had happened , aod 
besides, I never tiunk things hke that " Remarks of tins 
kind are qwte usual, and show how nebulous psychic facts 
are, or rather how vague they are on the subjective side-in 
reahty they are Just as obJective and as defirute as historical 
events. The truth 1s that I actually did thmk thus and thus, 
regardless of the conditions and stipulations I may attach 
to thJ.S fact Many people have to wrestle with themselves in 
order to make th1S perfectly obvious a.dnusston, and it often 
costs them a great moral effort These, then, are the diffi­
culties we encounter when we draw inferences about the state 
of affairs in the psyche from the tlnngs we observe outside. 
Now my more hmited field of work is not the clinical 
determmation of external characteristics, but the investiga­
tion and classmcabon of the psychic data which can be 
inferred from them. The first resnlt of this work is a 
descriptive study of the psyche, winch enables us to formulate 
certain theones about its structure. From the empirical 
apphcation of these theories there is finally developed a 
conception of psychological types. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comgo PSYCHOLOGICAL IBEORY OF TYPES 
Clinical studies are based upon the description of symptoms, 
and the step from this to the descriptive study of the psyche 
is comparable to the step from a purely symptomatic 
pathology to the pathology of the cell and of metabolism. 
That is to say that the descnptive study of the psyche 
brings into view those psychic processes in the hinterland 
of the mind which produce the clinical symptoms. As 
we know, this insight is gained by the apphcatwn of 
analy1:lcal methods. We have today a substanllal knowledge 
of those psyclnc processes which produce the neurotic 
symptoms, for our descriptive study of the psyche has 
advanced far enough to enable us to detemune the com­
plexes. Whatever else may be takmg place withm the 
obscure recesses of the psyche-and there are notonously 
many opmions as to this matter-one thmg IS certain· 1t 
is first and foremost the so-called complexes (emotionally 
toned contents having a certain amount of autonomy) 
wluch play an important part there The expreSSJ.on 
" autonomous complex " has often met with oppos:1:b.on, 
although. as it seems to me, unJustifiably. The active 
contents of the unconscious do behave in a way I cannot 
describe better than by the word " autonomous ". The 
term is used to indicate the fact that the complexes offer 
resistance to the conscious intentions, and come and go 
as they please. Accordmg to our best knowledge about 
them., complexes are psychic contents wluch are outSlde the 
control of the CODSClOUS mind. They have been spht off 
from COllSciousness and lead a separate existence in the 
unconscious, being at all times ready to hmder or to reinforce 
the conscious intentions. 
A further study of the complexes leads inevitably to the 
problem of their origin, and as to this a number of chfferent 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES gr 
theories are current. Apart from theories, experience shows 
us that complexes always contain something hke a confiict­
they are either the cause or the effect of a conflict At 
any rate, the characteristics of confhct-that is, shock, 
upheaval, mental agony, inner stnfe-are pecuhar to the 
complexes They have been called in French b&s nou·es, 
while we refer to them as .. skeletons in the cupboard ". 
They are " vulnerable points " which we do not like to 
remember and still less to be remmded of by others, but 
wluch frequently come back to mind unbidden and m the 
most unwelcome fashion They always contam memones, 
wishes, fears, dunes, needs, or views, with which we have 
never really come to terms, and for t1us reason they con­
stantly interfere with our conscious life in a disturbing and 
usually a harmful way. 
Complexes obviously represent a land of infenority m 
the broadest sense-a statement I must at once qualify 
by saying that to have complexes does not necessanly 
indicate mfenonty It only means that somethmg incom­
pa:tJ.ble, unassunilated, and confhcting exists-perhaps as 
an obstacle, but also as a stunulus to greater effort, and so, 
perhaps, as an operung to new po.s51bihtles of acluevement. 
Complexes arc therefore, m this sense, focal or nod.al points 
of psychic We whl.Ch we would not wish to do without. 
Indeed they must not be lackmg, for otherwise psychic 
activity would come to a fatal standstill. But they inchca.te 
the unresolved problems of the incliVldual, the points at 
which he has suffered a defeat, at least for the time being, 
and where there 1S something he cannot evade or overcome­
his weak spots in every sense of the word. 
Now these characteristics of the complex throw a significant 
hght on its genesis. It obviously anses from the clash 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com92 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
between a requirement of adaptation and the individual's 
constitutional inability to meet the challeoge. Seen iD this 
bght, the complex is a symptom which helps us to diagnose 
an individual disposition. 
Experience shows us that complexes are infinitely vaned, 
yet careful companson reveals a reJabvely small number of 
typical primary patterns, all of winch have their origms iD 
the first experiences of cluldhood. This must necessanly 
be so. because the individual disposition is already a 
factor in cluldhood ; it is mnate, and not acquired m the 
course of hie. The parental complex IS therefore nothing 
but the first mamfestation of a clash between reality 
and the mdividual's consbtut1onal inability to meet the 
requirements 1t demands of bun. The first form of the 
complex cannot be other than a parental complex, because 
the parents are the first reality with which the child comes 
into con:fhct 
The existence of a parental complex therefore tells us 
httle or nothing about the peculiar constitution of the 
individual. Practical expenence soon teacl!es us that the 
crux of the matter does not lie in the presence of a parental 
complex, but rather iD the spec,al way iD winch the complex 
works itself out in the hfe of the mdividual. As to t1us we 
observe the most staking vanations, and only a very small 
number can be attnbuted to the speaal traits of parental 
inftuence. There are often several cluldren who are exposed 
to the same mfluence, and yet each reacts to it in a totally 
different way. 
I have turned my attention to these very ditfeteru:es, 
because I believe that it is through them that specilically 
mdividual dispositions can be recognized. Why, in a 
neurotic family, does one child react with hysteria, another 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 93 
with a compulsion neurosis, the third with a psycb.OS1s, and 
the fourth apparently not at all ' Tlus problem of the 
.. choice oi the neurosis ", with wlnch Freud also was 
confronted, robs the parental complex as such of all 
ztiological meaning, and slnlts the enqwry to the reacting 
individual and !us special disposi!Jon 
Although Freud's attempts to solve tlus problem leave 
me entirely wisatisfied, I am myself unable to answer the 
quesbon. Indeed, I trunk the tune IS not yet npe for raising 
this question of the choice of the neufOSIS. Before we take 
up this extremely c:hfficult problem, we must know a great 
deal more about the way in wluch the m<hvtdual reacts 
The question is · How does a person react to an obstacle ? 
For mstance, we come to a brook where there 1S no bndge 
The stream is too broad to step across, and we must Jump. 
To make this poss1ble, we have at our disposal a comphcated 
functional system, namely, the psycho-motor system It 
is completely developed and needs only to be released 
But before tlus happens, sometlung of a purely psyclnc 
nature takes place, that is, the declSl.OU is made about what 
is to be done. This lS followed. by activities wluch settle 
the issue in some way and are different for each mdJ.vidual. 
But, sigmfi.cantly enough, we rarely, d ever, recogmze these 
events as charactenstic, for we cannot as a rule see ourselves 
at all, or only at the very end. Tlus is to say that, Just as 
the psycho-motor apparatus 1S automatically at our chsposal., 
so there 1S an exclusively psychic apparatus ready for our 
use 10 the making of decisions winch works also by habit 
and therefore UDCODSClOUsly. 
Opinions differ very widely as to what this apparatus is 
like. It is certain only that every individual bas his 
accustomed way of meetu,g decmons and of deahng with 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com94 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
chfliculties. One person will say he jumped the brook for 
the fun of the thing ; another that it was because there 
was no alternative ; a third that every obstacle he meets 
challeuges him to overcome it, A fourth person did not 
jump the brook because he hates useless effort, and a fifth 
refrained because he saw no urgent nece5Slty for crossing 
to the other side. 
I have purposely chosen this commonplace example in 
order to show how irrelevant these incentives seem. They 
appear so futile, indeed, that we push them all to one SJde 
and are inclined to substitute our own explanation And 
yet 1t is just these variants that furnish us with valuable 
insight into the individual systems of psycluc adaplabon. 
If we examine, in other mtuations of hfe, the person who 
crossed the brook because it gave bun pleasure to Jump, 
we shall probably find that for the most part what he does 
and onuts to do can be explamed m terms of the pleasure 
it gives him. We shall observe that the one who sees no 
other means of getting across, goes through hie carefully, 
but unwilhngly, always makmg reluctant decisions In 
all these cases special psycluc systems are m readiness to 
carry out decisions offhand We can ea.stly 1magme that 
the number of these attitudes ts legion. The particular 
variations are certainly as innumerable as the vanat:J.ons of 
crystals wlnch nevertheless may be recognized as belonging 
to one or another system. But just as crystals show basic 
uniformities which are relatively sunple, so do these personal 
a.ttltudes show certain fundamental traits which allow us to 
assij:n them to defimte groups 
Since the earliest times, attempts have repeatedly been 
made to clasmly individuals according to types and thus to 
bring order into what was confusion. The oldest attempt 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 95 
of this sort known to us was made by onenW astrologers 
who devu;ed the so-called trigons of the four elements, air, 
water, earth and fire The tngon of the all' as it appears 
in a horoscope coDS1Sts of the three " aerial " SigDS of the 
zodiac, Aparms, Gemsn, and Lsbra ; the trigon of fire is 
made up of An'8, Leo and Sagi#anus. Accordmg to tins 
age-old view, whoever lS born in these trigons shares in their 
aerial or fiery nature and reveals a corresponding disposition 
and destiny. This ancient cosmological scheme is the parent 
of the physiological type-theory of antiquity accordmg to 
wlnch the four dispositions correspond to the four humours 
of the body What was first represented by the SigDS of 
the zodiac was later expressed in the physiological terms of 
Greek medicine, givmg us the cla.sstfication mto phlegmatic, 
sangwne, cholenc, and melanchohc These are merely 
terms for the supposed humours of the body As 15 well 
known, tins classJ.fication lasted nearly seventeen centuries. 
As for the astrological type-theory, to the astonishment of the 
enbghtened, it remains mtact today, and IS even en1oymg 
anew vogue 
This histoncal retrospect may set our mmds at rest as 
to the fact that our modern efforts to formulate a theory of 
types are by no means new and unprecedented, even 1f our 
saentific conscience no longer permrts us to revert to these 
old, intwtive ways of handhng the question We must 
.find our own answer to t1us problem-an answer which 
satisfies the demands of science 
And here we meet the chief chfliculty of the problem of 
types-that is. the question of standards or cntena. The 
astrological critenon was sun.pie • 1t was given by the 
constellations As to the way in which the elements of 
human character could be ascnbed to the zochaca1 signs and 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comg6 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
the planets, tlus is a question which reaches back into the 
grey mists of prehistory and remains unanswerable The 
Greek classifu:ation acconlmg to the lour physiological 
dispositions took as its criteria the appearance and behaviour 
of the mdividual, exactly as is done today in the case of 
modern physiological types But where shall we seek our 
criterion :for a psychological theory of types ;, Let us return 
to the previously mentioned instance of the vanous mcli­
viduals who had to cross a brook How, and from what 
standpomt. should we classify their habitual incentives ;, 
One person does 1t from pleasure, another acts because not 
to act is more troublesome, a thud does not act because he 
has second thoughts, and so forth. The hst of poss,blhbes 
seems both endless and useless for purposes of classrlication 
I do not know how other people would set about the 
task. I can therefore only tell you how I myseli have 
approached the matter, and I must submit to the reproach 
that my way of solving the problem 1S the outcome of my 
mdJ.VJdual prejudice. Indeed, tlus obJecb.on is so entirely 
true, that I should not know how to meet it I Illlght, 
perhaps, content myself by refemng to Columbus, who, 
by usmg subjective assumptions, a false hypothesis, and a 
route abandoned by modem navigation, nevertheless dis-, 
covered America. Whatever we look at, and however we look 
at it, we see only through our own eyes For this reason 
a science JS never made by one man, but by many. The 
individual merely offers his contribution, and in this sense 
only do I dare to speak of my way of seeing things. 
My profession has always forced me to take account of 
the peculiarities of mdividuals. This has made 11 necessary 
for me to establish certain average truths, as also has the 
circumstance that in the course of many years I have had 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 97 
to treat innumerable married couples and have been faced 
with the task of making the standpoints of husband and 
wife mutually plausible. How many times, for example, 
have I not had to say : " Look here, your wife has a very 
active nature, and it cannot be expected that her whole 
existence should centre round housekeeping." Tlus is the 
beginning of a type-theory, a sort of statistical truth: there 
are active natures and passive ones. But this time-worn 
troth did not satisfy me Therefore I next tned to say that 
there were some persons given to reflection, and others who 
were unreJlective, because I had observed that apparently 
pa.ssive natures are in reality not so mu.eh passive as given 
to forethought They first collSlder a situation and then 
act; and because they do this habitually they miss oppor­
tunities where immediate actwn without forethought is 
called for, thus commg to be sbgm.a:bzed as passive. The 
persons who did not reflect always seemed to me to jump 
into a situation without any forethought, only per.haps to 
observe afterwards that they had landed in a swamp. Thus 
they could be considered " unreflective ", and this seemed 
a more appropnate designation than "active". Forethought 
is in certam cases a very unportant form of activity, Just as 
it IS a reasonable course of action m contrast to the 
effervescence of the person who must act at once at all 
costs. But I very soon discovered that the hesitat:J.on of 
the one was by no means always forethought, and that the 
qw.ck action of the other was not necessarily want of 
reflection. The hesitation of the former often arises 
from habitual timidity, or at least from somethmg like a 
customary shrinking backward as if faced with too heavy 
a task , while the munediate activity of the second is 
frequently made possible by a predommatmg self-confidence 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comg8 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
with respect to the object. This observation caused me to 
formulate these typical cbstmctions m the followmg way : 
there is a whole class of men who at the moment of reactJ.on 
to a given situation at first draw back a little as if with 
an unvoiced " No". and only after that are able to react; 
and there is another class who, in the same SJ.tuation. come 
forward with an immediate reaction, apparently confident 
that their behaviour is obviously right. The former class 
would therefore be characterized by a certam negative 
relation to the object, and the latter by a positive 
one. 
As we know, the former class corresponds to the intro­
verted and the second to the extraverted attitude. But with 
these two terms in themselves as httle is gamed as when 
Mohere's bou,geo1s gennlhomme chscovered that he ordmanly 
spoke m prose. These dISbncbons attam meaning and value 
only when we realize all the other charactenstJ.cs that go 
with the type. 
One cannot be introverted or extraverted without bemg 
so m every respect. By the term. " introverted " we mean 
that all psychic happenmgs take place in the way we posit 
as true of introverted people. Thus also, to estabhsh the 
fact that a certain individual is extraverted would be as 
irrelevant as proving that !us height IS six feet, or that 
he has brown hair, or is bra.chycephahc. These statements 
bring httle more to hght than the bare fact they express. 
But the expression •• extraverted '' claims to have more 
meaning. It states that, when a person is extraverted, his 
cODSC1ousness as well as his unconscious have defimte 
quahties ; that his general behaviour, his relation to people, 
and even the course of his hfe. show certain typical 
characteristics. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL TIIEORY OF TYPES 99 
Introversion or extraversion, as a typical attitude, means 
an essential bias which conditions the whole psychic process, 
establishes the habJ.tual reactions, and thus determines not 
only the style of behaV10ur, but also the nature of subjective 
experience. And not only so, but it also denotes the kmd 
of compensatory activity of the unconscious which we m.a.y 
expect to find. 
When the habitual reactions are determined, we can feel 
fatrly certain of havmg h.J.t the mark, because they govern 
external behaviour on the one hand, and on the other 
mould specrfic expenence. A certam kmd of behaviour 
brings correspondmg results, and the subjective under­
standing of these results gives nse to the expenences wluch 
m tum mflu.ence behaviour, and thus close the cucle of an 
mdividual's destmy. 
Although there need be no doubt that with the habitual 
reactions we touch upon a decl.Slve matter, there remams 
the dehcate question as to whether we have satisfactorily 
charactenzed them There can be an honest difference of 
opm1on about tlus even among persons with an equally 
mtuna.te knowledge of the speaal field. In my book on 
types ' I have gathered together all that I could find in 
support of my conception, but I have made it very clear 
that I do not hold mine to be the only true or possible 
type-theory. Thul theory IS S1Inple enough, COOSlSting as 
1t does in the contrast between introversion and extra­
versJ.on , but sunple formulations are unfortunately most 
open to doubt They all too easily cover up the actual 
complexities, and so deceive us. I speak here from my own 
experience, for scarcely had I published the first formulatinn 
of my cntena, when I dlscovered to my dismay that somehow 
1 ~ T,t,as, Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co , London 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com100 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
or other I had been taken in by it. Something was out of 
gear. I had tned to explain too much in too simple a way, 
as often happens in the first JOY of discovery. 
What struck me now was the undeniable fact that while 
people may be classed as introverts or extraverts, these 
distinctions do not cover all the diMimilarities between the 
individuals in either class. So great, indeed, are these 
differences that I was forced to doubt whether I had observed. 
correctly in the first place. It took nearly ten years of 
observation and comparison to clear up this doubt. 
The question as to the great vanatton observable among 
the members of each class entangled me in unforeseen 
chffi.culties which for a long time I could not master. To 
observe and recognize the differences gave me comparatively 
little trouble, the root of my difficulties being now, as before, 
the problem of criteria. How was I to find the nght terms 
for the charactenstic drl'ferences ? Here I realtzed for the 
first time and to the full extent how young psychology 
really is. It is still little more than a chaos of arbitrary 
opiruons, the better part of which seems to have been produced 
in the study and consulting-room by spontaneous generation 
from the isolated and therefore J ovian brains of learned 
scholars. Without wishing to be irreverent, I cannot refrain 
from confronting the Professor of Psychology with the 
mentahty of women, of the Chinese, and of Australian 
Negroes. Our psychology must embrace all life, otherwise 
we simply remain enclosed in the Middle Ages. 
I have realized that no sound criteria are to be found in 
the chaos of contemporary psychology. They have first to 
be made-not out of whole cloth, of course, but on the basis 
of the invaluable preparatory work done by many men whose 
names no history of psychology will pass over in silence. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES IOI 
Within the lunits of an essay, I cannot possibly meotion 
all the separate observations that led me to pick out certain 
psychic functions as criteria for the des,gnation of the 
differences under discussion. I wish only to show how they 
appear to me as far as I have been able to grasp them. 
We must realize that an introvert does not simply draw 
back and hesitate before the object, bot that he does so 
in a very definite way, Moreover he does not behave in 
all respects like every other mtrovert, bot in a particular 
manner. Just as the hon strikes down Ins enemy or bis 
prey with )us fore-paw, in which lus strength resides, and 
not with his tail like the crocodile, so our habitual reactions 
are normally characterized by the application of our most 
trustworthy and efficient function ; 1t is an express10D of 
our strength However, this does not prevent our reacting 
occasionally in a way that reveals our specific weakness 
The predominance of a function leads us to construct or to 
seek out certain situations wlule we avoid others, and 
therefore to have experiences that are peculiar to us and 
different from those of other people. An intelligent man will 
make his adaptation to the world through his intelhgence, 
and not in the manner of a sixth-rate pugilist, even though 
now and then, in a .fit of rage, he may make use of his fists. 
In the struggle for existence and adaptation everyone 
instinctively uses his most developed function, which thus 
becomes the criterion of his habitual reactions 
The question now becomes · How is it possible to subsume 
all these functions under general concepts, so that they can 
be distinguished in the welter of merely contingent events 1 
In social life a rough grouping of this sort has long ago come 
about, and as a result we have types like the peasant, the 
worker, the artist, the scholaI, the warrior, and so forth 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com102 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
down the list of the various professions. But this sort of 
typificabon has very little to do with psychology, because-­
as a well-known scholar has mahc1ously remarked-there 
are savants who are merely " intellectual porters ". 
A type-theory must be more subtle. It 1S not enough, 
for example, to speak of intelligence, for this is too general 
and too vague a concept. Almost any behaviour can be 
called intelligent ii 1t works smoothly, quickly, effectively 
and to a purpose. Intelhgence, hke stupidity, 1S not a 
function but a modality ; the term tells us nothing more 
than how a function works. The same holds true of moral 
and zsthetic cntena. We must be able to designate what it 
is that functions outstandingly in the mdividual's habitual 
way of reacting. We are thus forced to resort to something 
winch at first glance alarmingly resembles the old faculty 
psychology of the eighteeoth century; in reality, however, 
we are only returmng to current ideas in daily speech, 
perfectly accessible and comprehensible to everyone. When, 
for mstance, I speak of "thinking", it is only the philosopher 
who does not know what I mean , no layman will find 1t 
incomprehensible. He uses this word every day, and always 
in the same general sense, though it is true enough that he 
is not a little embarrassed. if he is called upon suddenly to 
give an unequivocal definition of tlunking. The same IS 
true of " memory " or " feehng ". However ddlicult it 
is to define such notions scientifically and thus make of 
them psychological concepts, they are easily intelligible in 
current speech. Speech is a storehouse of uru,ges founded 
on experience, and therefore concepts which are too abstract 
do not easily take root in it, or quickly die out again for 
lack of contact with reality. But thinking and feeling are 
so obtrusively real that every language above the primitive 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES ro3 
level has aboolutely unmistakable expressions for them­
We can therefore be sure that these expressions coincide 
with perfectly definite psychic facts, no matter what the 
scientificdefinitwns of these complex facts may be Everyone 
knows, for example, what consciousness is, and nobody 
doubts that the concept covers a definite psychic concht1on, 
however far science may be from defining it satisfactonly. 
So it came about that I simply formed my concepts of 
the psychic functwns from the notions expressed in current 
speech, and used them as my cnteria in Judging the dif­
ferences between persons of the same attitude-type For 
example, I took tlunking as 1t ,s generally understood, 
because I was struck by the fact that many persons habitually 
do more thinkmg than others, and accordingly give more 
we,ght to thought when making important decmons. They 
also use then- thinkmg m trying to understand and adapt 
themselves to the world, and whatever happens to them 1S 
subjected to COilSlderabon and reflectwn, or at least reconciled 
with some pnnc1ple sanctioned by thought Other people 
conspicuously neglect thinkmg in favour of emotional 
lactOI11, that is, feehng They mveterately follow a "pohcy" 
chctated by feeling, and 1t takes an extraordmary SJ.tuabon 
to make them reflect. These persons exhibit a stnkmg and 
unmistakable contrast to the former Tius difference is 
most patent when, for example, a person of one kind is the 
partner m business or marriage of a person of the other 
lcind. Now a man may give preference to tlunking whether 
he be extraverted or introverted, but he always uses it in 
the way that is characteristic of his attitude-type. 
However, the predominance of one or the other of these 
functions does not explain all the differences to be found 
What I call the thmking or feelmg types embrace two groups 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com104 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
of persons who again have something in commm, which I 
cannot designate except by the word rationality. No one 
will dispute the statemeut that thinking is essentially 
rational, but when we come to feehng, certain objections 
may be r.used which I do not want simply to overrule ; on 
the contrary I freely admit that this problem of feeling has 
been one over wluch I have racked my brains. Yet, not 
to burden this essay with the various existing defimtions 
of this concept, I shall comine myi;elf briefly to my own 
view. The clue£ di:ffi.culty bes in the fact that the word 
" feeling " can be applied in all sorts of different ways 
This is especially true in the German language, but IS 
noticeable to some extent m English and French as well 
Fmrt of all, then, we must make a careful distmction between 
the concepts of feeling and sensation, the latter being taken 
to cover the sensory processes And in the !eCOild pia.ce 
we must recogmze that a feehng of regret 1S something quite 
d,fferent from a " feeling " that the weather will change 
or that the price of our alUDUlllum shares will go up. I 
have therefore proposed using the term " feeling " m the 
first instance, and dropping it-so far as psychological 
temunology is concerned-in the other two mstances 
Here we should speak of " sensation " when the sense 
organs are involved, and of intuitton if we are deahng with 
a kind of perception which cannot be traced directly to 
conscious sensory experience. I have therefore defined 
sensation as perception through conscious sensory processes, 
and intwtion as perception by way of unconscious contents 
Uld connections. 
Obviously we could argue until Doomsday about the 
fitness of these deftrutions, but the discussion eventually 
turns upon a mere question of tenns. It is as if we debated 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES zo5 
whether to call a certain animal a puma or a mountain-lion, 
when all that is needed ts to know what we WISb. to designate 
in a given way. Psychology is an unexplored field of study, 
and its particular idiom must fust be fixed. It 1S well known 
that temperature can be measured acconling to Reaumur, 
Celsius or Fahrenheit, but we must mdicate which system 
we are using 
It is evident, then, that I take feehng as a funcbon in 
itself and distinguish it from sensation and intuition. 
Whoever confuses these last two functions with feehng 
in this narrower sense, can obviously not acknowledge the 
rationality of feeling. But ii they are separated from 
feehng, it becomes quite clear that feeling values and feehng 
Judgements-that 1s to say, our feelmgs---are not only 
reasonable, but are also as discrinunating, logical and 
conSIStent as thmkmg Such a statement seems strange to 
a man of the thmkmg type, but we can understand this when 
we reahze that tn a person with a differentiated thmkmg 
function, the feeling function is always less developed, more 
pnnutive, and therefore contaminated with other functions 
-these being preClSely the functions which are not rational, 
not logical, and not evaluatmg, namely, sensation and 
intmtion. These two last are by their very nature opposed 
to the rational functions When we think, it 1S m order to 
Judge or to reach a conclusion, and when we feel it is in 
order to attach a proper value to something ; sensabon and 
intuit10n, on the other hand, are perceptive-they make us 
aware of what is happening, but do not interpret or evaluate 
it. They do not act selectively according to principles, but 
are simply receptive of what happens. But "what happens" 
is merely nature, and therefore essentially non-rational. 
There are no modes of inference by which it can be proved 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com1o6 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
that there must be so many planets, or so many species 
oi warm-blooded animals of this or that sort. Lack of 
ratlOnahty is a vice where thinking and feeling are called 
for-rationahty is a vice where sensation and intwtion 
should be trusted. 
Now there are many persons whose habitual reactions 
are non-rabonal, because they are based chiefly upon 
sensation or intuition. They cannot be based upon both at 
once, because sensation is just as antagonishc to intuition 
as thinkmg is to feeling When I try to assure myself with 
my eyes and ears of what actually occurs, I cannot at the 
same time give way to dreams and fantasies as to what lies 
round the comer. As this is just what the mtuitJ.ve type 
must do in order to give free play to the unconSC10us or to 
the obJect, it ts easy to see that the sensation type is at 
the opposite pole to the mtu11:J.ve Unfortunately, I cannot 
here take up the interesting vanatlons which the extraverted 
or introverted athtude produces m non-rational types 
Instead, I prefer to add a word about the effects regularly 
produced upon the other functions when preference 1s given 
to one. We know that a man can never be everytlung at 
once, never complete; he always develops certain qualities 
at the expense of others, and wholeness is never attamed. 
But what happens to those functions which are not developed 
by exercise and are not consciously brought into daily use ? 
They remain in a more or less prinutJ.ve and mfanttle state. 
often only half-conscious, or even quite unconscious These 
relatively undeveloped functions constitute a specific in­
feriority which is charactensuc of each type and is an 
integral part of the total character. The one-sided emphasis 
on thinking is always accompanied by an inferionty in 
feehng, and differentiated sensation and intuition are 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES IO'/ 
mutually inJurious. Whether a function is differentiated or 
not may easily be recognized from its strength, stability, 
constancy, trustworthiness and service in adaptedness. 
But mfenority m a function l!I often not so easily described 
or recognized. An essential criterion is its lack of self­
suffi.ciency, and our resulting dependence on people and 
CU"cumstances ; furthermore, its chsposing us to moods and 
undue sensitlvity, its untrnstworthmess and vagueness, and 
its tendency to make us suggestible We are always at a 
disadvantage m using the mfenor function because we 
cannot direct it, bemg m fact even its victllll9 
Smee I must restnct myself here to a mere sketch of the 
basic ideas of a psychological theory of types, I must 
unfortunately forego a detatled descnptwn of indJ.vidual 
traits and actions m the hght of this theory. The total 
result of my work in this field up to the present is the 
presentation of two general types covering the attitudes 
which I call extraversion and introversion Besides these, 
I have worked out a fourfold classification correspondmg to 
the functions of thinkmg, feehng, sensation and mtwhon. 
Each of these functions varies accordmg to the general 
attitude, and thus eight vanants are produced. I have been 
asked almost reproachfully why I speak of four functions 
and not of more or fewer. That there are exactly four is a 
matter of empirical fact. But as the followmg consideration 
will show, a certain completeness lS attamed by these four. 
Sensation estabhshes what IS actually given, thinking enables 
us to recogruze its meaning, feehng tells us its value, 
and finally mtuition points to the possibl.hties of the whence 
and whither that lie WJ.thin the immediate facts. In this 
way, we can onentate ourselves with respect to the immediate 
world as completely as when we locate a place geographically 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comxo8 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES 
by latitude and ]Dngitude. The !OOI functions are somewhat 
like the four pmnts of the compass ; they are just as 
axbfuary and just as indispensable. Nothing prevents OOI 
ahifting the cardinal pomts as many degrees as we like in 
one direction or the other, nor are we precluded from giving 
them different names. It is merely a question of convention 
and ccmpreherun1>ility. 
But one thmg I must confess : I would not for anything 
dispense with this ccmpass on my psychological Journeys of 
discovery. Tius is not merely for the obvious, all-too-human 
reason that everyone is in love with his own ideas. I value 
the type-theory for the objective reason that it offers a 
system of comparison and onentation which makes possible 
something that has long been lacking, a cntlcal psychology 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comV 
THE STAGES OF LIFE 
To discuss the problems connected with the stages of human 
development is an exacting task, for 1t means nothmg less 
than unfolding a picture of psychic hfe in its entirety from 
the cradle to the grave Within the narrow frame of this 
essay the task can be earned out only on the broadest lines, 
and it must be well understood that no attempt will be 
made to describe the normal psyclnc occurrences witlun the 
van.ons stages. We shall rather restnct ourselves and deal 
only with certam " problems " ; that is, with tlungs that 
are difficult, questionable or ambiguous ; in a word, with 
questions which allow of more than one answer-and, more­
over, answers that are always open to doubt For this reason 
there will be much to which we must add a question-mark 
in our thoughts. And-worse still-there will be some things 
which we must accept on fa.Ith, wmle now and then we must 
even indulge m speculations. 
If psyclnc hie consisted only of overt happenings-winch 
on a primitive level is still the case-we could content 
ourselves with a sturdy empiricism. The psychic hie of 
civilized man, however, is full of problems; we cannot even 
think of it except in terms of problems. Our psychic pro­
cesses are made up to a large extent of refl.ections, doubts 
and experiments, all of which are almost completely foreign 
to the unconscious, instinctive mind of primitive man. 
109 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comno THE STAGES OF LIFE 
It is the growth of consciousness which we must thank for 
the existence of problems ; they are the dubious gift of 
civilu.ation. It is just man's turning away from instmct­
his opposing hunself to instinct-that creates conscioumess 
Instinct is nature and seeks to perpetuate nature ; while 
conscioumess can only seek culture or its denial Even 
when we tum back to nature, inspired by a Rousseauesque 
longing, we " cultivate " nature. As long as we are still 
submerged m nature we are uncoDSC1ous, and we hve in the 
security of instinct that knows no problems Everythmg 
in us that still belongs to nature shnnks away from a 
problem ; for its name IS doubt, and wherever doubt holds 
sway, there is uncertainty and the poss,bihty of chvergent 
ways. And where several ways seem possible, there we 
have tumed away from the certain guidance of mstmct 
and are handed over to fear. For consciousness is now 
called upon to do that winch nature has always done for 
her children-namely, to give a certain, unquest10Dable and 
unequivocal decision. And here we are beset by an all-too­
human fear that conscioumess--our Promethean conquest­
may in the end not be able to serve us in the place of nature 
Problems thus draw us into an orphaned and isolated 
state where we are abandoned by nature and are dnven 
to consaousness. There is no other way open to us , we 
are forced to resort to decisions and solutions where we 
formerly trusted ourselves to natural happemngs. Every 
problem, therefore, bnngs the poss,bility of a widening of 
consciousoess-but also the necessity of saying good-bye 
to chtldlike unconsciousness and trust in nature. This 
necessity is a psychic fact of such importance that 1t 
constitutes one of the essential symbohc teachings of the 
Christian religion. It is the sacrifice of the merely natural 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comIBE STAGES OF LIFE III 
man-of the unconscious, ingenuous being whose tragic 
career began with the eatmg of the apple in Para<hse The 
b1bhcal fall of man presents the dawn of consciousness as 
a curse. And as a matter of fact it is m this hght that we 
first look upon every problem that forces us to greater 
consciousness and separates us even further from the paradise 
of unconscious childhood. Every one of us gladly turns 
away from bis problems , if possible, they must not be 
mentioned, or, better still, their existence 1s derued We 
wish to make our hves sunple, certain and smooth-and 
for that reason problems are tabu We choose to have 
certainties and no doubts-results and no expenments--­
without even seemg that certa.J.nties can arise only through 
doubt, and results through expenment The artful demal 
of a problem will not prcx:luce conviction, on the contrary, 
a wider and lugher conse1ousness 1s called for to give us 
the certamty and clanty we need 
Tins mtroductJ.on, long as 1t is, seemed to me necessary 
in order to make clear the nature of our subJect When we 
must deal with problems, we instmct1vely refuse to try 
the way that leads through darkness and obscunty We 
wish to hear only of uneqwvocal results. and completely 
forget that these results can only be brought about when 
we have ventured mto and emerged agam from the darkness. 
But to penetrate the darkness we must summon all the 
powers of enhghtenment that CODSC1ousness can offer ; as 
I have already said, we must even indnlge in speculations. 
Form treating of the problems of psychic hie we perpetually 
stumble over questions of principle belonging to the pnvate 
domains of the most different branches of knowledge. We 
d1Sturb and anger the theologian no less than the philosopher, 
the physician no less than the educator ; we even grope 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comll2 THE STAGES OF LIFE 
about in the field of the biologist and of the historian. This 
extravagant behaviour is not to be charged to our arrogance, 
but to the circumstance that man's psyche is a unique 
combmation of factors wluch also make up the special 
subjects of far-reaching lines of research. For it is out of 
himself and out of his peculiar constitution that man 
produced his scieuces. They are symptoms of his psyche. 
If, therefore, we ask ourselves the unavoidable queshon : 
" Why does man, in obvious contrast to the animal world, 
have problems ? "-we run mto that Inextricable tangle 
of thoughts which many thousands of mcis1ve mmds have 
brought about m the course of centuries. I shall not perfonn 
the labours of a Sisyphus upon this masterpiece of confusion, 
but will try to present quite simply my contnbution toward 
man's attempt to answer th1S basic question 
There are no problems without consc10usness. We must 
therefore put the question in another way · In what way 
does consciousness anse l Nobody can say with certamty, 
but we can observe small children in the process of becoming 
conscious. Every parent ca.n see 1t, If he pays attent10n. 
And this is what we are able to observe . when the child 
recognizes someone or something-when he " knows ,. a 
person or a thmg-th.en we feel that the cb.tld has conscious­
ness. That, no doubt, is also why in Paradise 11: was the 
tree of knowledge wluch bore such fateful fruit. 
But what is recognition or knowledge m tlns sense? We 
speak of " knowmg " sometlung when we succeed m hnlang 
a new perception to an already established context m such 
a way that we hold in consciousness not only the new 
perception but this context as well. " Knowing " is based, 
therefore, upon a COllSClOUS connection between psychic 
contents. We cannot have knowledge of disconnected 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE IIJ 
contents, and we cannot even be conscious of them. The 
first stage of consciousness, then, which we can observe 
consists in a mere connecb.on between two or more psychic 
contents. At tlus level, CODSC1ousness is merely sporadic, 
being lin11ted to the representation of a few connections, and 
the content is not remembered later on It is a fact that in 
the early years of hfe there is no continuous memory ; at 
the most there are islands of consciousness winch are like 
single lamps or lighted ob1ects ID the far-flung darkness 
But these 1Slands of memory are not the same as those 
initial connections between psychic contents , they contain 
somethmg more and something new. Tins somethmg IS 
that highly tm.portant senes of related contents wluch 
constitutes the so-called ego. The ego----qwte hke the 
untial content-senes-1s an obJect m consciousness, and for 
tins reason the chtld speaks of itself at first obJectively, in 
the tlurd person. Only later, when the ego-contents have 
been charged with energy of their own (very hlrely as a 
result of exercise), does the feehng of subJectJ.vity or 
"1-ness" anse. Tins is no doubt the moment when the 
child begins to speak of itself in the first person At this 
level the continuity of memory has its beginning Essentially, 
therefore, it is a continuity in the ego-memones. 
In the childJ.sh stage of consciousness there are as yet 
no problems ; nothing depends upon the subject, for the 
chtld itself 18 still wholly dependent upon its parents. It is 
as though 1t were not yet completely born, but were still 
enclosed in the psycluc atmosphere of its parents. Psychic 
birth, and with it the conscious distinction of the ego from 
the parents, takes place in the normal course of things at 
the age of puberty with the eruption of sexual life. The 
physiological change is attended by a psychic revolution. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE 
For the various bodily manifestations give such an emphasis 
to the ego that it often aMerts itself without stmt or measure. 
This is sometimes called " the unbearable age ". 
Until thts period is reached the psychic life of the individual 
is essentially governed by impulse, and few or no problems 
are met with. Even when external hm1tations oppose the 
subJecbve impulses, these restraints do not put the mdlvidual 
at variance with lnmself. He submits to them or circumvents 
them, remaining quite at one with bun.self. He does not yet 
know the state of inner tenston whi.ch a problem brings 
about This state only anses when what was an external 
hmitabon becomes an mner obstacle , when one unpulse 
opposes itself to another. Resort.mg to psychological terms 
we would say the state induced by a problem-the state 
of being at vanance with oneself-a.rues when, side by SJde 
with the senes of ego-contents, a second senes of equal 
mtensity comes into bemg. This second series, because of 
its energy-value, has a functional significance equal to that 
of the ego-complex; we might call 1t another, second ego 
whlch in a given case can wrest the leadership from the 
first. This bnngs about an estrangement from oneself­
the state that betokens a problem. 
With reference to what was said above we can epitomize 
as follows : the first stage of conscioumess which consists 
of recognizing or " knowing " is an anarclnc or chaotic 
state The second-that of the developed ego--complex­
is a monarchic or monistic phase. The t1nrd is another step 
forward in consciousness, and CODS1Sts in the awareness of 
one's divided state ; it is a dualistic phase. 
And here we take up our actual theme, namely the question 
of the stages of hie. First of all we must deal with the 
period of youth. It extends roughly from the yeani Just 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE 
after puberty to middle life, which itself begins betweeo 
the thirty-fifth and fortieth year. 
I might well be asked why I choose to begin with the 
second penod of human existence. Are there no di:flicult 
questions connected with childhood ? The complex psychic 
hfe of the cluld is of course a problem of the first magnitude 
to parents, educators and physicians • but when normal, the 
chtld has no real problems of its own. It 1S only when a 
human being has grown up that he can have doubts about 
hunself and be at vanance with hunself. 
We are all thoroughly fam.iha:r with the sources of the 
problems winch anse m the penod of youth. For most 
people it is the demands of hfe which harshly put an end 
to the dream of chtldhood If the mdividual is sufficiently 
well prepared, the transitwn to a professional career may 
take place smoothly. But 1£ he clmgs to tllus10ns that 
contradict reahty, then problems will surely anse No one 
takes the step into life without making certain presup­
posrb.ons----and occasionally they are false That is, they 
may not fit the conditwns mto wlnch one is thrown It is 
often a question of exaggerated expectations, of under­
estimation of ddficulties, of un1ustlfi.ed optmusm or of a 
negative attitude One could compile quite a hst of the 
false presuppositions which give nse to the earliest, conscious 
problems. 
But 1t is not always the contrast of subiective presupposi­
tions with external facts that gives rise to problems, it may as 
often be inner, psychic disturbances. They may exist even 
when thmgs run smoothly enough m the outer world. Very 
often it IS the disturbance of the psychic equilibnum by the 
sexual unpulse , and perhaps rust as often 1t is the feeling 
of inferionty wlnch springs from an unbearable seDS1tivity. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comII6 THE STAGES OF LIFE 
These inner diffi.culties may exist even when adaptation to 
the outer world has been achieved without apparent effort. 
It even seems as ii young people who have had to struggle 
hard for their existence are spared inner problems, while 
those for whom adaptation for some reason or other is 
made easy, run into problems of sex or confilcts growing 
from the seose of inferiority. 
People whose own temperaments offer problems are often 
neurotic, but it 'would be a senous misunderstanding to 
confuse the existence of problems with neuTI>SIS. There is 
a marked distinction between the two 10 that the neurotic 
is 111 because he is unconscious of hlS problems , wlule the 
man with a difficult temperament suffers from bts conscious 
problems without being ill 
If we try to extract the common and essential factors 
from the almost inexhaustible vanety of individual problems 
found in the period of youth, we meet in nearly all cases 
with a particular feature . a more or less patent clinging 
to the childhood level of consciousness-a rebellioo against 
the fateful forces in and around us which tend to involve 
us in the world. Somet.hing in us WlSh.es to remain a child ; 
to be Ull.COllSClOUS, or, at most, conscious only of the ego ; 
to reject everything foreign, or at least sub1ect it to our 
will ; to do nothing, or m any case indulge our own craving 
for pleasure or power. In this leaning we observe somethmg 
hke the inertia of matter ; it is persistence in a lutherto 
existmg state whose level of consciousness is smaller, 
rumower and more egoistic than that of the dua.hstic stage. 
For in the latter the individual finds himself compelled to 
recognize and to accept what is diflereot and strange as a 
part of his owo lile--as a kind of " also-I ". 
It is the extension of the horizon of life which is the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE 
essential feature of the dualistic stage--<md to wbkh 
resistance is offered. To be sure, this enlargement-or this 
diastole, to use Goethe's expression-had started long before 
tlus. It begins at birth, when the child abandons the narrow 
confinement of the mother's womb ; and from then on it 
gains stea.d.Jly until it reaches a critical point in that phase 
when, beset by problems, the mdividual begms to struggle 
against it. 
What would happen to him if he simply changed himself 
into that other, foreign, "also-I", and allowed the earlier 
ego to vanish into the past? We might suppose this to be 
a quite practJ.Cable course The very aim of religious 
educat10n, from the exhortatlOn to put off the old Adam, 
backward in bine to the rebnth ntuals of prnrutive races, 
is to transform. a human being into a new-a future-man, 
and to allow the old forms of life to die away. 
Psychology teaches us that, in a certain sense, there is 
nothmg in the psyche that is old, nothmg that can really, 
definitively die away. Even Paul was left with a sting in 
his flesh. Whoever protects lnmself against what ,s new 
and strange and thereby regresses to the past, falls into the 
same neurotic condition as the man who identtfies himself 
Wlth the new and runs away from the past The only 
difference is that the one has estranged hnnself from the 
past, and the other from the future In principle both are 
doing the same thing ; they are salvaging a narrow state 
of consciousness. The alternative is to shatter it with the 
tension inherent in the play of opposites-m the dualistic 
slage--imd thereby to build up a state of wider and higher 
consciousness. 
This outcome would be ideal if it could be brought about 
1n the second stage of life-but here is the rub. For one 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comII8 THE STAGES OF LIFE 
thing. nature cares notlung whatsoever about a higher level 
of consciousness; qwte the contrary. And then society 
does not value these feats of the psyche very lughly ; its 
prizes are always given for a.cluevement and not for per­
sonality-the latter being rewarded, for the most part, 
posthumously. This being so, a particular solution of the 
d.dliculty becomes compulsive : we are forced to hmit 
ourselves to the attainable and to differentiate particular 
aptitudes, for in tlns way the capable mdividual discovers 
Ins social being. 
Achievement, usefulness and so forth are the ideals which 
appear to gmde us out of the confusion of crowding problems 
They may be our lode-stars in the adventure of extending 
and sohdifying our psychic existences-they may help us 
in stnking our roots m the world , but they cannot gwde 
us m the development of that wider consciousness to wlnch 
we give the name of culture. In the penod of youth, at 
any rate, this course is the normal one and m all circum­
stances preferable to merely tossmg about m the welter of 
problems. 
The dtlemma is often solved, therefore, in tlus way : 
whatever is given to us by the past is adapted to the possi­
bJ.hties and the demands of the future. We limit ourselves 
to the attainable, and this means the renunaa:b.on of all 
other potentialities One man loses a valuable piece of his 
past, another a valuable piece of his future. Everyone can 
call to nund friends or schoolmates who were pronusmg and 
idealistic youngsters, but who, when met with years later, 
seemed to have grown dry and cramped in a narrow mould 
These are examples of the solution given above. 
The serious problems of hie, however, are never fully 
solved. If it should for once appear that they are, this 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF UFE II9 
is the sign that something has been lost. The meamng and 
design of a problem seem not to lie m its solution, but m 
our working at it incessantly. This alone preserves us from 
stultuicahon and petrifacbon. So also with that solutinn 
of the problems of the pen.ad of youth wluch COilSISts in 
restncllng ourselves to the attainable . 1t is only temporanly 
valid and not lasting in a deeper sense. Of course, to win 
for oneself a place m society and so to transform one's nature 
that it IS more or less fitted to this existence, is m every 
instance an important achievement. It is a fight waged 
witlun oneself as well as outsule, comparable to the struggle 
of the cluld to defend !us ego. This struggle, we must grant, 
is for the most part unobserved because it happens in the 
dark , but when we see how stubbornly c1nl.dish ill.US1ons, 
presuppositions and egoisb.c habits are still clung to m later 
years we are able to realize the energy 1t took to form them. 
And so 1t is also with the ideals, convictions, gw.c:hng ideas 
and attitudes wluch in the penod of youth lead us out mto 
hfe--for wluch we struggle, suffer and wm victones : they 
grow together with our own bemgs, we apparently change 
into them, and we therefore perpetuate them at pleasure 
and as a matter of course, JUSt as the child asserts its ego 
in the face of the world and m spite of itself----occasionally 
even to spite itself 
The nearer we approach to the nuddle of We, and the 
better we have succeeded in entrenchmg ourselves 1n our 
personal standpomts and social poS1tinns, the more it appears 
as if we had discovered the right course and the right ideals 
and pnnc1ples of behaviour. For this reason we suppose 
them to be eternally valid, and make a virtue of unchangeably 
chnging to them We wholly overlook the essential fact 
that the aclu.evements which society rewards are won at 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comI20 THE STAGES OF LIFE 
the cost of a duninution of personality. Jllany-far too many 
-aspects of hfe which should also have been experienced 
lie m the lumber-room among dusty memories. Sometimes, 
even, they are glowing coals under grey ashes. 
Statistical tables show a rise in the frequency of cases of 
mental depression in men about forty. In women the 
neurotic cbfficulties generally begin somewhat earher. We 
see that in this phase of life-between thuty-five and forty­
a mgnifi.ca.nt change in the human psyche is in preparation. 
At first it is not a conscious and stnking change , it is rather 
a matter of mdirect signs of a change which seems to take 
its nse from the unconscious. Often it is something hke 
a slow change in a person's character ; m another case 
certain traits may come to hght whlch had chsa.ppeared m 
clnldhood , or agam, inchnatioos and mterests begin to 
weaken and others arise to take their places. It also 
frequently happens that the convictions and pnnciples which 
have hitherto been accepted-especially the moral prin­
c1ples-comrnence to harden and to grow increasingly rigid 
until, somewhere towards the age of fifty, a period of 
intolerance and fanaticism is reached. It is then as if 
the existence of these pnnaples were endangered, and 1t 
were therefore necessary to emphasJ.ze them all the 
more. 
The wine of youth does not always clear with advancing 
years ; ofteotunes it grows turbul. All the manifestations 
mentioned above can be most clearly seen m rather one-sided 
people, turning up sometimes sooner and sometimes later. 
In my opinion, their appearance is often delayed by the 
fact that a person's parents are still alive. It is then as 
if the period of youth were uoduly contioued. I have seen 
this especially in the cases of men whose fathers were long· 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE 121 
lived. The death of the father then has the effect of an 
overhurried-an almost catastrophic-riperung 
I know of a pious man who was a churchwarden and 
who, from the age of forty onward, showed a growmg and 
:finally unbearable intolerance in things of morality and 
religlon. At the same time his disposition grew visibly 
worse. At last he was nothing more than a darkly lowering 
" pillar of the church " In this way he got along until 
his fifty-fifth year when suddenly, one mght, S1ttmg up in 
bed, he said to his wife : " Now at last I've got it I As 
a matter of fact I'm inst a plain rascal." Nor did this 
self-realization remain without results. He spent his 
dechning years in riotous hving and in wasting a goodly 
part of lus fortune. Obviously quite a likeable person, 
capable of both extremes I 
The very frequent neurotic disturbances of adult years 
have this m common, that they betray the attempt to 
carry the psychic dtspOS11:lons of youth beyond the threshold 
of the so-called years of discretion Who does not know 
those touch.mg old gentlemen who must always warm up 
the dish of their student days, who can fan the :flames of 
life only by renwuscences of their heroic youth-and who 
for the rest, are stuck m a hopelessly wooden pluhstinism ) 
As a rule, to be sure, they have this one ment which 1t would 
be wrong to undervalue · they are not neurotJ.c, but only 
boring or stereotyped The neurotic is rather a person 
who can never have tWngs as he would like them m the 
present, and who can therefore never enJoy the past. 
As formerly the neurob.c could not escape from childhood, 
so now he cannot pa.rt with lns youth. He shrinks from the 
grey thoughts of approaching age ; and, feehng the prospect 
before him unbearable, is always straunng to look behind 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com... THE STAGES OF LIFE 
hlm. Just as a childish peISOn shrinks back from the 
unknown in the world and in human existence, so the grown 
man shnnks back from the second half of hfe. It is as if 
unknown and dangerous tasks were expected of bun ; or 
as if he were threatened with sacrifices and losses which he 
does not wish to accept , or as if Ins hfe up to now seemed 
to him so fair and so precious that he could not do without it. 
Is it perhaps at bottom the fear of death ? That does 
not seem to me very probable, because as a rule death is 
still far m the distance, and is therefore regarded somewhat 
in the light of an abstracb.on Expenence shows us rather 
that the basis and cause of all the difficulties of tJns transition 
are to be found m a deep-,eated aod peculiar ~ within 
the psyche In order to chara.ctenze it I must take for 
comparison the daily course of the sun-but a sun that 1S 
endowed with human feehng and man's brmted CODSCJ.ous­
ness In the m.ormng 1t arises from the nocturnal sea of 
unconsciousness and looks upon the wide, bnght world 
which hes before it 1n a.n expanse that steadily widens the 
higher it climbs in the firmament In this extension of its 
field of action caused by its own rising, the sun will discover 
its significance ; 1t will see the attainment of the greatest 
posm1>le height-the widest posmble d!sseminabon of its 
blessings-as its goal. In this conviction the sun pursues 
its unforeseen course to the zemth ; unforeseen, because its 
career is unique and mdJ.Vldual, and its culmmatmg pmnt 
could not be calculated in advance. At t.he stroke of noon 
the descent begins. And the descent means the reversal of 
all the ideals and values that were cherished in the morning 
The sun falls into contradiction with itself. It is as though 
it should draw in its rays, instead of emitting them. Light 
aod warmth decline and are at last extinguished. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE I23 
All comparisons are lame, but this simile is at least not 
lamer than others. A French aphorism sums 1t up with 
cymcal resignation : Ss 3eunesse savast, m. v1elllesse pou,Hul. 
Fortunately we men are not rismg and setting suns, for 
then it would fare badly with our cultural values. But 
there is something sunhke withm us ; and to speak of the 
monung and spnng, of the evening and autumn of hfe is 
not mere sentunental Jargon. We thus give expression to 
a psychological truth, even more, to physwlogi.cal facts ; 
for the reversal at noon changes even bodily chara.ctensbcs. 
Especially among southern races one can observe that 
older women develop rough and deep voices, mcipumt 
moustaches, hard :fac1al expresswns and other masculine 
traits. On the other hand, the masculine physique is toned 
down by femmme features, as for instance ad.J.posdy and 
softer fa.ctal expressions. 
Th.ere 1S an interesbng report m ethnological hterature 
about an Indian warnor-chief to whom m ID.lddle age the 
Great Spmt appeared m a dream The spmt announced 
to him that from then on he must sit among the women 
and children, wear women's clothes and eat the food of 
women He obeyed the dream without suffenng a loss of 
prestige Tlus vision is a true expression of the psychic 
revolution of hfe's noon-of the begmmng of hfe's dechne 
Man's values and even Ins body tend to undergo a reversal 
mto the opposite. 
We might compare masculinity and femminity with their 
psyclnc components to a particular store of substances of 
which, in the fust half of life, unequal use is made. A man 
consumes !us large supply of mascuhne substance and has 
left ~ only the smaller amount of feminine substance, 
wluch he must now put to nse. It is the other way round 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comr24 THE STAGES OF LIFE 
with a woman ; she allows heI unused supply of masculinity 
to become active. 
Tins transformation weighs more heavily still in the 
psyclnc reahn than in the physical. How often it happens 
that a man of forty or fifty years winds up his business, and 
that his wife then dons the trousen and opens a httle shop 
where he sometimes perfonns the duties of handyman. 
There are many women who only awake to social responsi­
bility and to social consciousoess after their fortu:th year. 
In modern business life-espec,ally in the United States-­
nervous breakdown in the forties or after is a very common 
occurrence. If one studies the victuns a little closely one 
sees that the thing which has broken down is the masculine 
style of hfe which held the field up to now ; what is left 
over is an effeminate man. Contranwise, one can observe 
women in these self-same bUS111ess spheres who have 
developed in the second hall of life an uncommon mascuhruty 
and an inasiveness which push the feelings and the heart 
aside. Very often the reversal is accompanied by all sorts 
of catastrophes in marriage ; for 1t is not hard to imagine 
what may happen when the hosband discovers his tender 
feelings, and the wife heI sharpness of mind. 
The worst of it all IS that mtelligent and cultivated people 
have these leanings without even knowing of the possibility 
of such transformations. Wholly unprepared, they embark 
upon the second hall of hie. Or are there perhaps colleges 
for forty-year-olds which prepare them for their coming 
life and its demands as the ordinary colleges introduce OUI 
young people to a knowledge of the world and of life? No, 
there are none. Thoroughly unprepared we take the step 
into the afternoon of hfe ; worse still, we take this step with 
the false presupposition that OUI truths and ideals will serve 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE 125 
us as hitherto. But we cannot hve the afternoon of life 
according to the programme of life's mornmg-for what was 
great in the morning will be little at evening, and what in 
the morning was true will at evening have become a he. 
I have given psycllological treatment to too many people 
of advancing years, and ha.ve looked too often into the 
secret chambers of their souls, not to be moved by tins 
fundamental truth. 
Agemg people should know that their lives are not 
mounting and unfolding, but that an inexorable mner 
process forces the contraction of hfe For a young person 
it is almost a sm-and certainly a danger-to be too much 
occupied with himself ; but for the agemg person it lS a 
duty and a neces&1ty to give serious attenhon to hllnself. 
After having laVl.Sbed its hght upon the world, the sun 
withdraws its rays in order to illumine rtself Instead of 
doing likewise, many old people prefer to be hypochondnacs, 
nigguds, doctnnaires, applauders of the past or eternal 
adolescents-all lamentable substitutes for the tlluIDlllation 
of the self, but inevitable consequences of the delUS1on that 
the second half of life must be governed by the principles 
of the first 
I S8.J.d just now that we have no schools for forty-year­
olds. That is not quite trne. Our religions were always 
such schools in the past, but how many poople regard thero 
as such today ? How many of us older persons have really 
been brought up in such a school and prepared for the second 
half of life, for old age, death and eternity I 
A human being woold certainly not grow to be seventy 
or eighty years old If this longevity had no meaning for the 
species to which he belongs. The afternoon of human hie 
most also have a mgmficance of its own and cannot be 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comI:z6 THE STAGES OF LIFE 
merely a pitiful appendage to life's morning, The significance 
of the morning undoubtedly lies in the development of the 
mdividual, our entrenchment in the outer world, the pro­
pagatJ.on of our kind and the care of our cluldren. Tius 
is the obvious purpose of nature. But when this purpose 
has been attained-and even more than attained-shall the 
earmng of money, the extension of conquests and the 
expansion of life go steadily on beyond the bounds of all 
reason and sense ? Whoever carries over mto the afternoon 
the law of the morning-that is, the aims of nature-must 
pay for so domg with damage to his soul JU.St as surely as 
a growing youth who tries to salvage Ins cluld.J.sh egolSill 
must pay for this :austak.e with SOCial failure. Money­
making, SOCia1. existence, fanuly and posterity are nothing 
but plain nature-not culture. Culture hes beyond the 
purpose of nature Could by any chance culture be the 
mearung and purpose of the second half of We ? 
In primitive tnbes we observe that the old people are 
ahnost always the guanhans of the mystenes and the laws, 
and 1t is in these that the cultural hentage of the tnbe is 
expressed. How does the matter stand with us ;, Where 
JS the wisdom of our old people-where are then" precious 
secrets and their visions ? For the most part our old people 
try to compete with the young. In the United States 1t is 
almost an ideal for the father to be the brother of his sons, 
and foc the mother ii possible to be the younger s1Ster of 
her daughter. 
I do not know how much of thlS confusion comes as a 
reactron. to an earher exaggeration of the dignity of age, 
and how much is to be charged to false ideals. These 
undoubtedly exist, and the goal of those who bold them bes 
behind, and not in front. Therefore they are always stnving 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE 
to tum back. We have to grant to these persons that it is 
hard to see what other goal the second half of hfe can offer 
than the well-known goal of the first Expansion of hie, 
usefulness. efficiency, the cutting of a figure in SOCJ.al life, 
the shrewd steering of o:ffspnng mto swtable marnages and 
good positwns-are not these purposes enough? Unfor­
tunately tins is not enough meaning or purpose for many 
persons who see m the approach of old age a mere d11runution 
of life, and who look upon thell' earher ideals only as some­
thmg faded and worn out. Of course, 1f these persons had 
filled up the beaker of We earlier and emptied 1t to the lees, 
they would feel quite differently about everytlung now , 
had they kept nothmg back, all that wanted to catch fire 
would have been consumed, and the qwet of old age would 
be very welcome to them. But we must not forget that 
only a very few people are artists 10 hfe , that the art of hfe 
is the most cbstmgwshed and rarest of all the arts. Who 
ever succeeded in drammg the whole cup with grace ) So 
for many people all too much unhved hfe rem.a.ms over­
sometunes potentiahb.es winch they could never have hved 
with the best of wills , and so they approach the threshold 
of old age with unsatisfied cla.uns whl.Cb. inevitably tum 
their glances backward 
It IS particularly fatal for such people to look backward 
For them a prospect and a goal in the future are indis­
pensable. This is why all great rehglons hold the promISe 
of a hfe beyond , it makes it possible for mortal man to 
live the second half of hfe with as much perseverance and 
aim as the first For the man of today the enlargement of 
life and its culmmation are plausible goals ; but the idea 
of life after death seems to 1nm questionable or beyond 
belief. And yet hfe's cessation, that is, death, can only be 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comIzB THE STAGES OF LIFE 
accepted as a goal when existence 18 so wretched that we 
are glad for it to end. or when we are convinced that the 
sun stnves to its setting-" to illumine distant races .. _ 
with the same perseverance it showed in rising to the zenith. 
But to believe has become today such a drllicult art, that 
people, and particularly the educated part of humanity, 
can hardly find their way there. They have become too 
accustomed to the thought that, with regaid to immortality 
and such questions, there are many contrachctory oprmons 
and no convincing proofs Smee " SC1ence " has become 
the catchword which carries the weight of conviction m 
the contemporary world, we ask for " scientific " proofs. 
But educated people who can think, know that proof of this 
kind is out of the question We simply know nothmg 
whatever about 1t 
May I remark that, for the same reasons, we cannot know 
whether aoything happeus to a peISOO afteI he is dead 1 
The answer is neither yes nor no. We simply have no 
definite scientific proofs about it one way or another, and 
are therefore m the same position as when we ask whether 
the planet MaIS is inhabited OI not And the inhab1taots 
of Mars, If thel'e are any, are certainly not concerned whether 
we affirm or deny their existence. They may exist or not. 
And that IS how it stands with so-called imm.ortahty-with 
which we may shelve the problem. 
But here my physician's COilSCle1lce awakes and urges me 
to say a word which IS essential to tlus question I have 
obseived that a directed life is m general better, richer and 
healthier than an aimless one, and that it is better to go 
forwatds with the stream of time thao bacl<wards against 
it. To the psychotherapist an old man who cannot bid 
farewell to life appears as feeble and sickly as a young man 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE 129 
who is unable to embrace it. And as a matter of fact, in 
many cases it is a question of the selfsame cluldish covetous­
ness, of the same fear, the same obstinacy and wilfulness, in 
the one as in the other. As a physict.an I am convinced that 
it is hygienio-if I may use the word-to discover in death 
a goal towards which one can stnve ; and that shnnkmg 
away from it is something unhealthy and abnormal which 
robs the second half of life of its purpose. I therefore 
COilSlder the rebglous teaching of a life hereafter consonant 
with the standpoint of psychic hygiene. When I hve in a 
house which I know will fall about my head within the next 
two weeks, all my vital fonctlOllS will be impa,red by tlus 
thought : but d on the contrary I feel myself to be safe, 
I can dwell there in a normal and comfortable way. From 
the standpoint of psychotherapy it would therefore be 
desirable to tbmk of death as only a transition-one part 
of a We-process whose extent and dura1J.on escape our 
knowledge 
In spite of the fact that by far the larger part of mankind 
does not know why the bcxly needs salt, everyone demands 
it none the less because of an instinctive need. It is the 
same in the things of the psyche. A large majonty of people 
have from tune jmmemorial felt the need of believing in 
a continuance of hfe. The demands of therapy, therefore, 
do not lead us mto any bypaths, but down the noddle of 
the roadway trodden by humankmd. And therefore we 
are thinkmg correctly with respect to the meaning of hie, 
even though we do not understand what we think. 
Do we ever understand what we think? We only under­
stand that thinking which is a mere equation, and from winch 
nothing comes out but what we have put in That is the 
wnrking of the intellect. But beyond that there is a thinking,. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comI30 THE STAGES OF LIFE 
in primordial images-in symbols which are older than 
historical man ; which have been ingrained in him from 
earliest times, and, etemally living, outlasting all generations, 
still make up the groundwork of the human psyche It is 
only possible to hve the fullest life when we are m harmony 
with these symbols ; wisdom is a mum to them. It is 
neither a question of belief nor of knowledge, but of the 
llj!l'eement of our thinking with the primordial images of 
the unconscious. They are the source of all our conscious 
thoughts, and one of these primordial thoughts is the idea 
of life after death. Science and these symbols are incom­
mensurables. They are indispensable conditions of the 
1.magma:bon ; they are pnmary data-the materials whose 
expechency and warrant to exist science cannot deny offhand 
It can only treat of them as given facts, much as 1t can 
explore a function like that of the thyroid gland, for example 
Before the nineteenth century the thyroid was regarded as 
a meaningless organ, merely because it was not understood. 
It would be equally short-51ghted of us today to call the 
primordl.al images sense1es For me these images are 
something hke psychic OigBDS, and I treat them with the 
very greatest care. It happens sometimes that I must say 
to an older patient : " Your picture of God or your idea of 
lDlillOrtality is atrophied , consequently your psychic 
metabolism is out of gear." The ancient athanassas 
pharmakon, the medicament of immortality, is more profound 
and meamnglul than we supposed. 
In this place I would like to mum again for a moment 
to the comparison with the sun The one hundred and 
eighty degrees of the arc of life are divisible into !OUI parts. 
The fiist quarter, lymg to the east, is childhood-that state 
in which we are a problem for others, but are not yet 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE STAGES OF LIFE 131 
conscious of any problems of our own. Conscious problems 
fill out the second and third quartets, while in the last­
in extreme old age--we descend again into that condition 
where, unworried by our state of consciousness, we again 
become something of a problem for others. Childhood and 
extreme old age, to be sure, are utterly different, and yet 
they have one thing in common : submersion in unconscious 
psychic happenings. Since the mmd of a clnld grows out 
of the unconscious, its psychic processes-though not easily 
a.ccessible-are not as chfficult to discern as those of a very 
old person who has plunged again mto the unconsC1ous, and 
who progressively vanishes within it, Cluldhood and old 
age are the stages of hfe WJ.thout any conscJ.ous problems, 
for which reason I have not taken them into consideration 
here 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comVI 
FREUD AND JUNG-CONTRASTS 
Tm difference between Freud's views and my own ought 
really to be dealt with by someone who stands outside the 
circles of influence of those ideas wlu.ch go under our 
respective names. Can I be credited with sufficient unpar­
tiality to rise above my own ideas ? Can any man do this ? 
I doubt it. If I were told that someone bad nvalled Baron 
llliinchausen by aa:omphshing such a feat, I should feel 
sure that his ideas were borrowed ones. 
It is true that widely accepted ideas are never the personal 
property of their so-called author; on the contrary, he 1S 
the bond-servant of lus ideas. Impressive ideas which are 
hailed as truths have something pecuhar to themselves 
Although they come into being at a definite time, they are 
and have always been tuneless ; they arise from that realm 
of procreative, psychic life out of wluch the ephemeral mind 
of the single hwnan being grows like a plant that blossoms, 
bean fruit and seed, and then withers and dies. Ideas 
spring from a source that is not contained within one man's 
personal life. We do not create them; they create us. To 
be sure, when we deal in ideas we inevitably make a. con­
fession, for they bring to the light of day not only the best 
that in us lies, but our worst insufliciencies and personal 
shortcomings as well. This is especially the case with ideas 
abont psychology. Whence should they come except from 
I3" 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comFREUD AND JUNG I33 
the most sabJectJve side of life ? Can experience with the 
objective world save us from subJective prejudgements ? 
Is not every experience, even m the best of circumstances, 
to a large extent subJectJ.ve interpretation ? On the other 
hand, the subject also is an objective fact, a piece of the 
world. What issues from it comes, after all, from the 
universal soil, just as the rarest and strangest organism is 
none the less supported and nounsbed by the earth which 
we all share in common. It IS precisely the most subjective 
ideas which, bemg closest to nature and to the livmg being, 
deserve to be called the truest. But what is truth ? 
For the purposes of psychology, I think it best to abandon 
the notion that we are today in anythmg like a positwn to 
make statements about the nature of the psyche that are 
" true " or " correct ". The best that we can achieve is 
true expression. By true expression I mean an open avowal 
and a detailed presentation of everything that is subjectively 
noted. One person will stress the fonns into which this 
material can be worked, and will therefore beheve that he 
has created what he finds within himself. Another will 
lay most weight upon the fact that he plays the part of 
an observer ; he will be conscious of his receptive attitude, 
and msist that his subjective material presents itself 
to him. The truth lies between the two. True expression 
consists in giving form to what is observed. 
The modem psychologist, however unbounded his hopes, 
can hardly claim to have achieved more than the right sort 
of receptivity and a reasonable adequacy of expression. The 
psychology we at present possess is the testimony of a few 
individuals here and there regarding what they have found 
within themselves. The fonn in which they have cast it 
is sometimes adequate and sometimes not. Since each 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com134 FREUD AND JUNG 
individual conforms more or less to a type. his testimony 
can be accepted as a fairly vahd description of a large 
number of people. And since those who conform to other 
types belong none the less to the human species. we may 
conclude that the descripllon applies, though less fully, to 
them too. What Freud has to say about sexuality, infanttle 
pleasure, and their conflict with the " pnnc1ple of reahty ", 
as well as what be says about incest and the hke, can be 
taken as the truest expression of Ins own psychic make-up 
He has given adequate form to what he has noted m himself. 
I am no opponent of Freud's ; I am merely presented in 
that bght by his own short-Sightedness aod that of his 
pupils. No expenenced psychotherapist can deny haV1Dg met 
with dozens of cases at least wlnch answer in all essentials 
to Freud's descnphons. By Ins avowal of what he has 
found in himself, Freud has assisted at the birth of a great 
truth about man. He has devoted hlS hfe and hts strength 
to the constructlon of a psychology which is a formulation 
of his own being 
Our way of looking at things is conditioned by what we 
are And smce other people are differently constituted, they 
see tlungs differently and express themselves differently 
Adler, one of Freud's earhest pupils, is a case m pomt. 
Working with the same empincal matenal as Freud, he 
approached it from a totally different standpoint His way 
of looking a.t things is at least as convincmg as Freud's, 
because he also represents a well-known type. I know that 
the followers of both schools flatly assert that I am in the 
wrong, but I may hope that history and all fair-rmnded 
persons will bear me out Both schools, to my way of 
thinking, deserve reproach for over-emphasizing the patho­
logical aspect of life and for interpreting man too exclusively 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comFREUD AND JUNG I35 
in the light of his defects. A convincing example of this 
in Freud's case is Ins inability to understand religious 
experience, as is clearly shown in his book : The Future of 
an llltmon. For my part, I prefer to look at man m the 
light of what in lwn is healthy and sound, and to free the 
sick man from that point of view which colours every page 
Freud has wntten. Freud's teaching is definitely one-sJ.ded 
in that it generalizes from facts that are relevant only to 
neurotic states of mind ; its validity is really confined to 
those states. Within these Imuts Freud's teaching is true 
and vahd even when it is in error, for error also belongs to 
the picture, and cames the truth of a true avowal In any 
case, Freud's is not a psychology of the healthy mind 
The morbul symptom in Freud's psychology 1s this. it 
is based upon a view of the world that 1S uncnticized, or 
even unconscwus, and this IS apt to narrow the field of 
human expenence and understandmg to a constderable 
extent It was a great ID1Stake on Freud's part to turn his 
back on phtlosophy. Not once does he cnticize his premises 
or even the assumpb.ons that underhe his personal outlook. 
Yet to do so was necessary, as may be inferred from what 
I have said. above , for had he critJ.cally exa.nnned his 
assumptions, he would never have put Ins pecuha.r mental 
disposit:aon naively on view, as he has done in The lnte'IP,~ 
tatson of Dreams At all events, he would have had a taste of 
the difficulties wluch I have met with I have never refused 
the bitter~sweetdnnk of phtlosophicalcritiCIS1U, but have taken 
it with caution, a little at a tune. All too httle, my opponents 
will say , almost too much, my own feeling tells me. All 
too easily does self-criticism polSOil one's naivete, that 
priceless possession, or rather glft, which no creative man 
can be without, At any rate, plnlosophical criticism has 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comFREUD AND JUNG 
helped me to see that every psychology-my own included 
-has the character of a subjective confession. And yet I 
must prevent my critical powers from destroying my 
creativeness. I know well enough that every word I utter 
carries with it something of myself-of my special and 
umque self with its particular history and its own particular 
world. Even when I deal with empui.cal data, I am 
necessarily speaking about myself. But it is only by 
accepting tlus as inevitable that I can serve the cause of 
man's knowledge of man-the cause which Freud also wished 
to serve, and winch, in spite of everything, he has served. 
Knowledge rests not upon truth alone, but upon error also. 
It is perhaps here, where the question arises of accepting 
the fact that every psychological teaching which is the work 
of one man is sub1ectively coloured, that the hne between 
Freud and myself is most sharply drawn. 
A further difference seems to me to consist in this, that 
I try to free myself from all unconscious and therefore 
uncriticized assumptions as to the world m general I say 
" I try ", for who can be sure that he has freed himself 
from all Ins unconscious assumptions ? I try to save myself 
at least from the crassest prejudices, and am therefore 
inchned to recognize all manner of gods provided only that 
they are active in the hwnan psyche I do not doubt that 
the natural instmcts or drives are farces of propulsion in 
human life, whether we call them sexuality or the will to 
power ; but I also do not doubt that these instincts come 
into collision with the spirit, for they are contmually 
colliding with something, and why should not this something 
be called spirit ? I am far from knowing what spirit is in 
itseH, and equally far from knowing what instincts are. The 
one is as mysterious to me as the other, yet I am unable 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comFREUD AND JUNG 
to dismiss the one by explaining it in terms of the other. 
That would be to treat it as a mere misunderstanding. The 
fact that the earth has only one moon IS not a misunder­
stand.mg There are no misunderstandings in nature ; they 
are only to be found in the realms that man calls " under­
standing ". Certainly instinct and spirit are beyond my 
understanding They are terms that we allow to stand for 
powerful forces whose nature we do not know. 
As may be seen, I attnbute a positive value to all religlons. 
In their symbohsm I recognize those figures which I have 
met with m the dreams and fantasies of my patients In 
their moral tea.chi.ngs I see efforts that are the same as or 
sunilar to those made by my patients, when, guided by 
their own insight or inspiration, they seek the right way of 
deahng with the farces of the inner hfe Ceremonial, ntual, 
imtiat1on ntes and ascetic practices, in all their forms and 
variatwns, interest me profoundly as so many techniques 
for bringing about a proper relation to these forces. I 
likewise attribute a po&1bve value to biology, and to the 
emptti.cwn of natural science in general, in wluch I see a 
herculean attempt to understand the human psyche by 
approaching it from the outer world. I regard the gnostic 
religions as an equally prodigious undertaking in the opposite 
direction · as an attempt to draw knowledge of the cosmos 
from within. In my picture of the world there is a vast 
outer realm and an equally vast inner realm , between these 
two stands man, facing now one and now the other, and, 
accordmg to his mood or disposition, taking the one for the 
absolute truth by denying or sacrificing the other. 
This picture IS hypothetical, of coUIBe, but it offers a 
hypothesis which is so valuable that I will not give it up. 
I consider it heuristically and empirically verified ; and. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comnmuo AND JUNG 
what is more, it is supported by the consfflSfl gfflffum. 
This hypothesis certainly came to me from an inner source, 
though I might imagine that empirical findings had led to 
its discovery. Out of 1t has come my theory of types, and 
also my reconciliation with views as different from my own 
as those of Freud. 
I see in all happening the play of opposites, and denve 
from this conception my idea of psychic energy. I hold 
that psychic energy involves the play of opposites in much 
the same way as physical energy involves a drlierence of 
potential, which is to say, the existence of such opposites 
as wann and cold, lngh and low. Freud began by taking 
sexuality as the only psychic dnving power, and only after 
my break with him did he grant an equal status to other 
psyclu.c activities as well. For my part, I have su.bswned 
the various psychic drives or forces under the concept of 
energy in order to av01d the arbitranness of a psychology 
that deals with drives or impulses alone I therefore speak, 
not of separate drives or forces, but of .. value intensities " 1 
By what has JUSt been said I do not mean to deny the 
rmportance of sexuality in psychic life, though Freud 
stubbornly maintains that I do deny it. What I seek is to 
set bounds to the rampant terminology of sex wluch threatens 
to vitiate all discUSSlon of the human psyche , I wish to 
put sexuality itself m its proper place. Common-sense will 
always return to the fact that sexuahty IS only one of the 
life-mstmcts---only one of the psycho-physiological functions 
-though one that is without doubt very far-reaching and 
important. 
Beyond all question, there is a marked disturbance today 
1 Compare the essay "On Psyclw:al :Energy " in C"""1btffl°'" lo 
.A.fl#lylUal P~. Kegan Paul, Treoch, Trubner & Co , London, 1928 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comFREUD AND JUNG 
in the realms of sexual life. It is well known that when we 
have a bad toothache, we can think of nothing else. The 
sexuahty which Freud describes is unmistakably that sexual 
obsession which shows itself whenever a patient has reached 
the point where he needs to be forced or tempted out of 
a wrong attitude or situation It is an over-emphasized 
sexuality ptled up behind a dam ; and it shrinkll at once to 
normal proportions as soon as the way to development is 
opened. It is being caught in the old resentments agamst 
parents and relations and m the bonng emotional tangles of 
the family situation which most often brings about the 
damming-up of the energies of We And it 1S this stoppage 
which shows itself unfailingly in that kind of sexuality which 
is called" infantile••. It is really not sexuality proper, but 
an unnatural discharge of tensions that belong to qwte 
another province of life This being so, what is the use of 
paddling about m this flooded country > Surely, straight 
thmkmg will grant that it is more important to open up 
drainage canals We should try to find, in a change of 
attitude or in new ways of hfe, that difference of potential 
which the pent-up energy requires. If this is not achieved 
a vicious circle is set up, and this is in fact the menace 
which Freudian psychology appears to offer. It points no 
way that leads beyond the mexorable cycle of b10Iogica.l 
events This hopelessness would drive one to exclaim with 
Paul : " Wretched man that I am, who wtll dehver me from 
the body of this death ;, " And our man of intellect comes 
forward, shakmg his head, and says in Faust's words . 
" Thou art COllSClOUS only of the single urge ", namely of 
the fleshly bond leading back to father and mother or 
forward to the children that have sprung from our flesh­
" incest " with the past and " incest " with the future, the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comFREUD AND JUNG 
original sin of the perpetuation of the family situation. 
There is nothing that can free us from this bond except that 
oppos1te urge of hfe, the spirit. It IS not the children of 
the flesh, but the " children of God " who know freedom. 
In Ernst Barlach's ITilgic novel of family hie, De, Tole Tag, 
the mother-dzm.on says at the end : " The strange thing 
is that man will not learn that God is h1S father." That is 
what Freud would never learn, and what all those who 
share his outlook forlnd themselves to learn. At least, they 
never find the key to this knowledge. Theology does not 
help those who are looking for the key, because theology 
demands fmth, and faith cannot be made : 1t is in the 
truest sense a gift of grace. We modems are faced with 
the necessity of rediscovering the life of the spuit ; we must 
expenence it anew for ourselves. It is the only way in which 
we can break the spell that binds us to the cycle of bwlogical 
events. 
My position on this question is the third point of difference 
between Freud's views and my own Because of it I am 
accused of mysticism. I do not, however, hold myself re­
sponsible for the fact that man has, everywhere and always, 
spontaneously developed rehgious forms of expression, and 
that the human psyche from time immemorial has been 
shot through with religious feelings and ideas. Whoever 
cannot see this aspect of the human psyche is blind, and 
whoever chooses to explain it away, or to " enlighten" it 
away, has no sense of reality. Or should we see in the 
father--complex which shows itself in all the members of 
the Freudian school, and in its founder as well, convincing 
evidence of any release worth mentioning from the inexorable 
family situation 1 This father..:omplex, fanatically defended 
with such stubbornness and over-sensi:bvity, is a cloak for 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comFREUD AND JUNG 
religiosity misunderstood ; it is a mysticism expressed in 
terms of biology and the fllJll1!y relatron. As for Freud's 
idea of the .. super-ego ", it is a furtive attempt to smuggle 
in his time-honoured image of Jehovah in the dress of 
psychological theory. When one does things like that, it 
is better to say so openly. For my part, I prefer to call 
things by the names under which they have always been 
known. The wheel of history must not be turned back, 
and man's advance toward a spiritual hfe, wb.tch began with 
the primitive ntes of imtla.tion, must not be denied. It is 
penmssible for science to divide its field of enquiry and to 
set up limited hypotheses, for SCJ.ence must work in that 
way ; but the human psyche may not be pa.rcelled out. It 
is a whole which embraces cODSClousness, and is the mother 
of CODSCiousness. Scientific thought, bemg only one of its 
functions, can never exhaust all the poss1bilities of hfe. 
The psychotherapist must not allow his vim.on to be coloured 
by the glasses of pathology , he must never allow hunself to 
forget that the ailing nund is a human mind, and that, for 
all its ailments, it shares in the whole of the psychic life of 
man. The psychotheraplSt must even be able to admit 
that the ego is ill for the very reason that 1t 18 cut off from 
the whole, and has lost its connection with mankind as well 
as with the spirit. The ego is mdeed the " place of fears ", as 
Freud says in The Ego and the Id, but only so long as it has 
not returned to the " father ,. and " mother ". 1 Freud ship­
wrecks on the question of Nicodemus . " Can a man enter 
his mother's womb a second time and be born again ? " To 
compare small things with great, we might say that history 
repeats itself here, for the question once more comes to the 
front today in a domestic quaxrel of modem psychology. 
11,,apmtandnature (Tn1111) 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comFREUD AND JUNG 
For thousands of yea,s, rites of initiation have been 
teaching spiritual rebirth ; yet, strangely enough, man 
forgets again and again the mearring of divine procreation. 
This is surely no evidence of a strong life of the spint ; and 
yet the penalty of misunderstanding is heavy, for it IS 
nothing less than neurotic decay. embitterment, atrophy and 
stenhty. It is easy enough to drive the spirit out of the 
door, but when we have done so the salt of life grows flat­
it loses its savour. Fortunately, we have proof that the 
spirit always renews its strength in the fact that the central 
teaching of the ancient initiations is handed on from 
generation to generatwn. Ever and again human beings 
arise who understand what is meant by the fact that God 
is our father. The equal balance of the flesh and the spui.t 
is not lost to the world 
The contrast between Freud and myself goes back to 
essential dtfferences in our basic assumptions. Assumpb.ons 
are unaV01d.able, and t1ns being so, 1t is wrong to pretend 
that we have made no assumptions. That IS why I have 
dealt with fundamental questwns ; with these as a startmg­
point, the manifold and detailed differences between Freud's 
views and my own can best be understood. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comVII 
ARCHAIC MAN 
THE word " archaJ.C " means primal---onginal While 1t is 
one of the most difficult and thankless of tasks to say any­
thing of importance about ClVlW',ed man of today. we are 
apparently in a more favourable pos1bon with regard to 
archru.c man. In the first case we try to reach a commandmg 
pomt of view, but actually are caught in the same pre­
suppos1t10ns and blinded by the same prejudices as are 
those about whom we wJ.Sh to speak. In the case of the 
archaic man. however, we are far removed from lns world 
m tune, and our mental capacib.es are more differen:b.a.ted 
than lus. It is therefore apparently possible for us to occupy 
a pomt of vantage from which we can overlook hJs world 
and the meaning it held for him 
This sentence delimits the sub1ect to be covered m the 
present essay. Save by restricting myself to the psychic 
hfe of archaic man, I could hardly paint lus picture 1n so 
small a space I shall confine myself to the task of makmg 
tlus picture sufficiently inclusive, and shall not consider 
the findings of anthropology with regard to primitive races. 
When we speak of man m general, we do not have his anatomy 
-the shape of his skull or the colour of his skin-in mind, 
but mean rather his psychic world, his state of consciousness 
and his mode of life. Smee all this belongs to the subject­
matter of psychology, we shall be dealing here chiefly with 
x43 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comIff ARCHAIC MAN 
archaic or primitive mentality. Despite this limitation it 
turns out that we have actually widened our theme, because 
it is not only primitive man whose psyclnc processes are 
arcluuc. The civilized man of today shows these archaic 
processes as well, and not merely in the form of sporadic 
" throw-backs " from the level of modem social bfe On 
the contrary, every civilized human being, whatever Ins 
conscious development, is still an archaic man at the deeper 
levels of his psyche. Just as the human body connects us 
with the mammals and displays numerous rehcs of earlier 
evolutionary stages going back even to the reptilian age, so 
the human psyche is lik:eWISe a product of evolution which, 
when followed up to its ongins, shows countless archaic 
traits. 
When first we come into contact with pnnutive peoples 
or read about prurutive mentality in SC1entlfic works, we 
cannot fail to be deeply impressed with the strangeness of 
arcluuc man. L~-Bruhl himseH, an authority in the 
field of the psychology of primitive socieb.es, never weanes 
of msisting upoo the striking difference between the " pre­
logical " state of mind and our conscious outlook. It seems 
to him, as a civilized man, inexplicable that the primitive 
should disregard the obvious lessons of expeneoce, should 
flatly deny the most evident causal connections, and instead 
of accountmg for things as accidents or on reasonable 
grounds, should simply take their " collective represeota­
tions" to be valid offhand. By "collective representations" 
Levy-Bruh! means widely curreot ideas whose truth ,s held 
to be seH-evident, such as the primitive ideas regarding 
spirits, witchcraft, the power of medicines, and so forth. 
While ii is perfectly understandable to us that people die 
of advanced age or as the result of diseases that are 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 145 
recCJSDi,.ed to be fatal, this IS not the case with primitive 
man, When old persons die, he does not believe it to be 
as a result of age. He argues that there are persons who 
have grown much older. Likewise, no one dies as the result 
of disease, for there have been other people who recovered 
from the same disease, or never contracted it To him, 
the real explanation is always magic. Eithex a spin! has 
killed the man, or sorcery bas done so. Many primitive 
tribes recognize death in battle as the only natural death 
Still other tribes regard even death in battle as unnatural, 
hold.mg that the adversary who brought 1t about must 
either have been a sorcerer or have used a channed weapon. 
Tins grotesque idea can on occasJ.ons take an even more 
1D1press1ve form. For instance, two anklets were found in 
the stomach of a crocodile shot by a European The natives 
recognized the anklets as the property of two women who, 
some time before, had been devoured by a crocodtle At 
once the charge of witchcraft was raised, for this qmte 
natural occurrence, which would never have aroused the 
suspicions of a European, was given an unexpected inter­
pretation in the light of one of those presuppos1llons which 
Levy-Bruhl calls" collective representations" The natives 
said that an unknown sorcerer had summoned the crocodile 
and had bidden it to bring him the two women The crocodtle 
had carried out the command. But what about the anklets 
in the beast's stomach ? The natives maintained that 
crocodiles never ate people unless bid.den to do so. The 
crocodile had received the anklets from the sorcerer as 
a rewaxd. 
This stoxy is a perfect example of that capricious way of 
accounting for things which is a feature of the " pre-logical " 
state of mind. We call it pre-logical, because to us socb an 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
explanation seems absolutely illogical. But it only strikes 
us in this way because we start from assumptions wholly 
different from those of primitive man. If we were as con­
vinced. as he is of the existence of sorcerers and of mystenous 
powers, instead of believing in so-called natural ea.uses, hIS 
inferences would seem to us perfectly reasonable. As a 
matter of fact, primitive man is no more logical or illogical 
than we are. lbs presuppos1tJ.ons are not the same as ours, 
aud that is what distinguishes him from us. His thinkmg 
and his conduct are based on assumptions other than our 
own. To all that is in any way out of the ordinary and 
that therefore disturbs, frightens or astomshes 1nm, he 
ascribes what we should call a supernatural ongm For 
him, of course, these things are not supernatural , on the 
contrary, they belong to his world of expenence We feel 
we are statmg a natural sequence of events when we say 
this house was burned down because the llghtmng struck it. 
Pnnutive man senses an equally natural sequence when be 
says · a sorcerer has used the lightmng to set fire to tlus 
particular house There 1S nothmg whatever wtthm the 
experience of primitive man-provided. that it is at all 
unusual or unpressive-that will not be accounted for on 
sunw grounds. In explaining things in tins way he is 
just like ourselves : he does not examine Ins assumptions. 
To hun it is an unquestionable truth that disease and other 
ills are caused by spirits or witchcraft, just as for us it is 
a foregone conclusion that an illness has a natural cause. 
We would no more lay it down to sorcery than he to natural 
causes. His mental activity does not differ in any funda­
mental way from Olll'S. It is, as I have said, his assumptions 
alone that set hlm apart from ourselves. 
It is often supposed that primitive mau has other feelings 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN I47 
than we, and another moral outlook-that the " pre­
logical " state of mmd differs from ours in these respects 
also. Undoubtedly he has a different code of morals. When 
questioned as to the distinction between good and bad 
a negro chieftain declared: "When I steal my enemy's 
wives, it ts good, but when he steals mine, 1t 1S bad " In 
many regions it is a temble insult to tread upon a person's 
shadow, and m others 1t IS an unpardonable sm to scrape 
a sealskin with an iron knife mstead of a flmt one. But 
let us be honest Do we not think 1t sinful to eat fish with 
a steel kwfe, for a man to keep 1us hat on 1n a room, or to 
greet a lady with a agar m his mouth ' With us, as well as 
with pnnub.ve man, such things have nothmg to do with 
ethics There are true and loyal head-hunters, and there 
are men who piously and conSC1entiously practise cruel 
ntes, or comnut murder from righteous convtct.J.on Prumtive 
man is no less prompt than we are to value an etlucal 
attitude His good 1s just as good as ours, and his evil is 
Just as bad as ours Only the fonns under which good and 
evil appear are different, the process of ethical judgement 
is the same 
It is hkewISC thought that primitive man has keener 
sense-organs than we, or that they somehow differ from ours. 
But his highly refined sense of direction or of hearing and 
vision is entirely a question of Ins occupations If he is 
confronted with situations that are foreign to lns experience, 
he is amazmgly slow and clumsy. I once showed some 
native hunters, who were as keen-sighted as hawks, 
magazine pictures in winch any of our children would have 
mstantly recognized human figures But my hunters 
turned the pictures round and round until one of them, 
traciDg the outhnes with his finger, finally exclaimed : 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
"These are white men." It was hailed by all as a great 
discovery. 
The incredibly accurate sense of locahty shown by maoy 
natives is a matter of practice. It is absolutely necessary 
that they should be able to find their way in forests aod 
junglea. Eveo the European, after a short while m Afnca, 
begins to notice thiop he would never have dreamed of 
noticing before; he does 1t out of the fear of going hopelessly 
astray in spite of his compass. 
Notlung goes to show that pnmitive man thinks, feels, 
or perceives in a way that differs fundamentaJJy from ours. 
His psycluc functioning is essentially the same-only his 
primary assumptions are ddferent Compared to this it 
is a relatively ummportant fact that he has, or seems to 
have, a smaller area of consciousness than we, and that he 
is not very capable, or is quite incapable, of concentrated 
mental activity. This last, 1t is true, strikes the European 
as strange. For instance, I could never hold a palaver for 
longer than two hours, Slllce by that time the natives always 
declared themselves bred. They said it was too difficult, 
aod yet I had only asked quite simple questions in a 
desultory way. These same natives showed an astonishing 
concentration and endurance when out hunting or on a 
journey. My letter-carrier, for instance, could nm seventyw 
five miles at a stretch. I saw a woman in her sixth month 
of _.,ancy, carrying a baby on her back aod smoking a 
long pipe of tobacco, dance almost the whole night through 
round a blazing fire when the tempera.tare was 95°. without 
collapaing. It caooot be denied that primitive people are 
capable of concentrating upon things that interest them. 
If we try to give our attention to uninteresting matters, we 
soon notice how feeble our powen of concentration are. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
We ourselves, like them, are dependent upon emotional 
under-currents. 
It is true that pnmitive man is simpler and more childlike 
than we, in good and evil alike. This in itself does not 
impress us as strange. And yet, when we approach the 
world of archaic man, we have the feeling of something 
prod,glously strange. As far as I have been able to analyse 
it, this feeling comes maJ.nly from the fact that the primary 
assumptions of archaic man cliff.er essentially hom oun-­
that he hves, if I may use the expression, in a different 
world. Until we come to know lus presuppositions, he is a 
riddle hard to read, but when we know them, all is relatively 
sunple. We m,ght equally well say that primitive man 
ceases to be a nddle when we have come to know our own 
presuppositions. 
It is a rational presupposition of ours that everythmg has 
a natural and perceptible cause. We are convinced of this. 
Causality, so understood, is one of our most sacred dogma,. 
There is no legitimate place in our world for mvislble, 
arbitrary and so-called supernatural forces-unless, indeed, 
we follow the modem physicist m his scrutmy of the minute 
and secret world of the atom wherem, as it appears, curious 
things come to pass. But that lies far from the beaten 
track. We distinctly resent the idea of mvimble and arbitrary 
forces, for it is not so long ago that we made our escape 
from that frightening world of dreams and superstitions, 
and constructed for ourselves a picture of the cosmos worthy 
of rational consciousness-that latest and greatest achieve­
ment of man. We are now surrounded by a world that IS 
obedient to rational laws. It is true that we do not know 
the causes of everything, but they will in time be discovered, 
and these discoveries will accord with our reasoned expecta-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
tums. That is our hope, and we take it as much for granted 
as prinuhve man does bis own assumpb.ons. There are 
also chance occurrences, to be sure, but these are merely 
accidental, and we have granted them a causahty of their 
own. Chance occurrences are repellent to the mind that 
lovos order. They have a laughable and therefore irritating 
way of throwing out of gear the precb.ctable course of events. 
We resent the idea of chance occurrences as much as that 
of invisible forces, for they remmd us too much of Satanic 
1D1ps or of the capnce of a dMa ex ma&hina. They are the 
worst enemies of our careful calculatwns and a contmual 
threat to all our undertakmgs. Being admittedly contrary 
to reason, they deserve contempt, and yet we should not 
fail to give them thell' due. The Arab shows them greater 
respect than we He wntes on every letter lnsha-4llah, "If 
if please God ", for only then will the letter arrive. In spite 
of our reluctance to adnut chance, and in spite of the fact 
that events run true to general Jaws, 1t is undeniable that 
we are always and everywhere exposed to incalculable 
accidents And what is more invisible and arbitrary than 
chance ) What is more unavoidable and more annoying ? 
If we consider the matter, we might as well say that the 
causal connection of events according to general laws is 
a theory wluch is home out about half the time, while for 
the rest the demon of chance has his way. A chance 
occurrence also has its natural causes, and we must often 
discover to our sorrow that they are commonplace enough. 
It is not the fact that the cause of the accidents is unknown 
to us that annoys us ; the irritating thing about them is 
that they befall us here and now in an apparently arbitrary 
way. That is how 1t stokes us. at least. An accident is 
always irritating. and even the most dyed-m-the-wool 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
rationalist may be moved to curse it. However we interpret 
an accidental event, we cannot alter the fact that 1t has 
the power to affect us The more the conditions of existence 
become subject to regulation, the more IS chance excluded 
and the less do we need to protect ourselves against it. 
None the less, everyone takes account of the pos51bility of 
accidental occurrences, or counts upon them, even though 
the official " credo " does not countenance this belief. 
It is our assumption, amounting to a positive conviction, 
that everythmg has causes wluch we call natural and wluch 
we at least suppose to be perceptible Primitive man, on 
the other hand, assumes that everything is brought about 
by mvisible, arbitrary power>-in other words, that every­
thing is chance. Only he does not call it chance, but 
intention. Natural causation is to him a mere semblance 
and not worthy of menhon If three women go to the river 
to draw water, and a crocodile seizes the one m the centre 
and pulls her under, our view of thmgs leads as to the 
verdict that it was pure chance that that particular woman 
was sewd The fact that the crocodile seized her seems to 
us natural enough, for these beasts occas1onally do eat human 
beings For primitive man such an explanation completely 
obhterates the facts, and accounts for no aspect of the 
whole exciting story Archaic ma.n IS right in holdtng our 
view of the matter to be superficial or even absurd, for the 
a.cCJ.dent might not have happened and still the same inter­
pretation would fit the case. The prejudice of the European 
does not allow bun to see how little he really explains things 
in such a way. 
Prinut1ve man expects more of an explanation. What 
we call chance is to bun arbitrary power It was therefore 
the intention of the crocodile--as everyone could observe-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
to seize the woman who stood between the other two. If it 
had not had this intention ii would have taken one of the 
others. But why did the crocodile have this intention 1 
These animals do not ordinarily eat human beings. This 
assertion is correct-quite as correct as the statement that 
there IS no rainfall m the Sahara. Crocodiles are really 
tinnd ammals, and are easily frightened. Considering their 
numbers, they kill astonishingly few people, and it IS an 
unexpected and unnatural event when they devour a man. 
Such an event calls for explanation. Of hlS own accord 
the crocodile would not take a human life. By whom, then, 
was he ordered to do so 1 
It is on the facts of the world around him that primitive 
man bases his verdicts. When the unexpected occurs he 
IS justmably astODIShed and wishes to know the specific 
causes. To t1us extent he behaves exactly as we do. But 
he goes further than we. He has one or more theones about 
the arbitrary power of chance. We say. Nothing but 
chance. He says : Calculating intention. He lays the chief 
stress upon the confusmg and confused breaks m the chain 
of causation-upon those occurrences that fail to show the 
causal connections which science expects, and that constitute 
the other half of happenings in general. He has long ago 
adapted bunself to nature in so far as it conforms to general 
laws ; what he fears is unpredlctable chance whose power 
mak<s him see m it an arlntrary and mcalculable agent. 
Here again he is nght. It is q111te understandable that 
everything on! of the ordinary sbonld frighten him. Ant­
eaters are fairly numerous in the regions south of Mount 
Elgon where I stayed for some time. The anteater is a shy, 
noctumal animal that is rarely seen. If one happens to be 
seen by day, it is an extraoi:dinary and unnatural event 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN I53 
wluch astonishes the natives as much as the discovery of a 
brook that occasionally !lows uphill would astonish us. If 
we .knew of actual cases in wlu.ch water suddenly overcame 
the force of gravity. such knowledge would ea.use us no 
little anxiety. We know that tremendous masses of water 
surround us, and can easily imagine what would happen 
if water no longer conformed to gravitational law. Tlus is 
the situation in wluch primitive man finds hunself with 
respect to the happerungs in his world. He IS thoroughly 
familiar with the habits of anteaters, but when one of them 
transgresses the Jaws of nature 1t acqwres an incalculable 
sphere of actron. Pnmitive man is so strongly impressed 
by things as they are, that a transgreSS10n of the Jaws of his 
world exposes lwn to unforeseen poss1bihties. Such an 
excepb.on IS a portent, an omen, comparable to a comet or 
an eclipse. Smee in his view such an unnatural event as 
the appearance of an anteater by day can have no natural 
causes, some mV1S1ble power must be behind 1t And the 
alamung mamfestatwn of a power wluch can annul COSID1C 
laws calls of course for extraordmaty measures of placation 
or sell-defence. The neighbouring villages must be aroused, 
and the anteater must be dug up with the utmost pams, 
and killed. The oldest maternal uncle of the man who saw 
the anteater must then sacnfice a bull. The man descends 
into the sacrificial p1t and receives the first piece of the 
animal's flesh, whereupon the uncle and the other parlll:1-
pants m the ceremony also eat. In tlus way the dangerous 
caprice of nature is expiated 
As for us, we should certainly be alarmed enough if water 
began to run uphill for unknown reasons, but are not when 
an anteater is seen by day, or an albmo is born, or an echpse 
takes place. We know the meaning and the sphere of action 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
of such happenings. while primitive man does not. Ordinary 
events constitute for him a coherent whole in which he and 
all other creatures are embraced. He is therefore extremely 
conservative, and does what others have always done. If 
something happens, no matter where, to break the coherence 
of this whole, he feels there is a rift m lus well-ordered world. 
Then anything may happen-heaven knows what. All 
occurrences that are m any way striking are at once brought 
into connection with the unusual event For instance, a 
missionary set up a flagstaff in front of his house so that he 
could raise the Union Jack on Sundays But this innocent 
pleasure cost him dear It was a smgular and disturbmg 
action, and when shortly afterwards a devastating storm 
broke out, the flagstaff was of course made responsible. 
This sufficed to start a general uprising against the missionary. 
It is the regularity of common occurrences that assures 
pnmittve man of a sense of security in Ins world Every 
exceptional event seems to 1nm the threatening act of an 
arbitrary power that must be expiated. It 1s not only a 
momentary mterrupbon of the ordinary course of things, 
but also the portent of other untoward events. 
This stnkes us as nothing less than absurd inasmuch as 
we forget how our grandparents and our great-grandparents 
still felt about the world. A calf is born with two heads and 
five legs. In the next village a cock has lalCI an egg. An 
old woman has had a dream, a comet appears in the sky, 
there is a great fire in the nearest town, and the followmg 
year a war breaks out. In this way history was always 
written from remote antiquity on down to the eighteenth 
century. This juxtaposition of facts, so meaningless to 
us, js significant and convincing to primitive man. And, 
contrary to all expectation, he is right to find it so. His 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC .MAN I55 
powers of observation can be trusted. From age-old 
experience he knows that such connections actually exist. 
What seems to us a wholly senseless heapmg-up of single, 
haphazard occurrences-because we pay attention only to 
single events and their particular causes-is for primitive 
man a completely logical sequence of omens and of happenings 
indicated by them. It is a fatal outbreak of demonic power 
showing 1tseH in a thoroughly C011S1Stent way. 
Toe calf with two heads and the war are one and the 
same, for the calf was only an anticipation of the war. 
Prim.1t1ve man finds tills connection so unquestionable and 
convincing because the capnce of chance seems to him a 
far more unportant factor in the happemngs of the world 
than regulanty and conformity to laws Thanks to his 
close attention to the unusual he has preceded us in di.s­
covenng that chance events arrange themselves in groups 
or senes The law of the duphcation of cases is known to 
all doctors engaged 1n chn1cal work. An old professor of 
psychiatry at Wurzburg always used to say of a particularly 
rare clinical case : " Gentlemen, this IS an absolutely umque 
case-tomorrow we shall have another Just hk:e it." I have 
myself often observed the same thmg during my eight 
years' practice m an insane asylum On one occasJ.on a 
person was committed for a rare twilight-state of conscious­
ness-the first case of tlus kind I had ever seen. W1thm 
two days we had a simtlar case, and that was the last . 
.. Duplication of cases " is with us a joke of the clinics, but 
it has also been, from time lllll11em.orial, a fact of primitive 
science A recent investigator has ventured the statement : 
"Magic IS the science of the Jungle." Astrology and other 
methods of divination may undoubtedly be called the science 
of antiquity. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC HAN 
What happens regularly is easily observed because we 
are prepared for 1t. Knowledge and skill are only needed 
in situations where the course of events is arbitrarily dis­
rupted in a way hard to fathom Generally it is one of the 
cleverest and shrewdest men of the tnoe who is entrusted 
with the observation of events. His knowledge must suffice 
to explain all nnusual occurrences, and his art to combat 
them. He is the scholar, the specialist, the expert on the 
subject of chance occurrences, and at the same time the 
keeper of the archives of the tribe's traditional lore. Sur­
rounded by respect and fear, he enJoys great authority, 
yet not so great but that his tribe is secretly convinced that 
their neighbouni have a sorcerer who is stronger than theu,;. 
The best medicine 1S never to be found close at hand, but 
as far away as possible. I stayed for a time with a tribe 
who held their old medicine-man in the greatest awe. 
Nevertheless be was consulted only for the minor ailments 
of cattle and men. In all senous cases a foreign authority 
was called in-a M'ganga (sorcerer) who was brought at a 
high price from Ugandn-just as with us 
Chance events occur most often in larger or smaller series 
or groups. An old and well-tried rule for foretelling the 
weather is this, that when 1t has rained for several days it 
will also rain tomorrow. A proverb says· '' Misfortunes 
never come singly.'' Another has 1t that "It never rains 
but it pours." Such proverbial wisdom is primitive science. 
The people believe it and hold it in awe, while the educated 
man smiles at it-nntil something nnusual happens to him. 
I will tell you a disagreeable story. A woman I know was 
awakened one morning by a peculiar tinkhng on her nlght­
table. After looking about her for a while she discovered 
the eause : the rim of her tumbler had snapped oil in a ring 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 157 
about a quarter of an inch wide. This struck her as peculiar. 
and she rang for another glass About five minutes later 
she bean! the same tinkling, and again the rim of the glass 
bad broken off. This time she was greatly disquieted, and 
bad a thiid glass brought. W1thm twenty minutes the rim 
broke off again with the same noise Three such accidents 
in immediate succession were too much for her. She gave 
up her behef in natural causes on the spot, and brought out 
JO its place a "collective representation "-the conviction 
that an a,bitraiy power was at work Something hke this 
happens to many modem people-provided they aie not 
too hard-headed-when they are confronted with events 
which natural causation fails to explain We naturally 
prefer to deny such occurrences They are unpleasant 
because they disrupt the orderly course of our world and 
make anything seem possible. Their effect upon us shows 
that the prim1t1ve mmd is not yet dead 
Primitive man's behef in arbitrary power does not arise 
out of thm air, as was always supposed, but is grounded in 
expenence What we have always called his supenitition is 
justified by the grouping of chance occurrences. There is 
a real measure of probabihty that unusual events will 
coincuie in time and place. We must not forget that our 
experience is not fully to be trusted in this regard Our 
observation is inadequate because our pomt of view leads 
us to overlook these matters. For instance, in a serious 
mood it would never occur to us to take the following events 
as a sequence : in the morning a bll"d files into your room, 
an hour later you witness an acCJ.dent in the street, in the 
afternoon a relative dies. in the evening your cook drops 
the soup tureen, and, on coming home late at night, you 
find that you have lost your key. Primitive man would 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
not have overlooked a single item in this chain of events. 
for every new link would have answered to his expectations 
And he is right-he is much more nearly right than we are 
willing to admit. HIS anxious expectations are justified 
and serve a purpose. Such a day, he holds, is ill-omened, 
and on it nothing should be undertaken. In our world this 
would be reprehensible superstition, but in the world of 
primitive man it is highly appropnate shrewdness In 
that world man is far more exposed to accidents than we 
in our protected. and well-regulated existence When you 
are in the wilderness you dare not take too many chances 
The European soon comes to appreciate this. 
When a Pueblo Indian does not feel m the right mood, 
he stays away from the men's council When an ane1ent 
Roman stumbled on the threshold as he left his house, he 
gave up hlS plans for the day. This seems to us senseless, 
but under prinutive conditions of life such an omen inchnes 
one at least to be cautious. When I am not in full control 
of myself, my bodily movements may be under a certain 
constraint ; my attention is easily distracted ; I am some­
what absent-mmded. As a result I knock against sometlung, 
stumble, let something fall or forget something Under 
civilized conditions these are mere trifles, but in the pnmeval 
forest they mean mortal danger It is fatal to make a false 
step upon the rain-soaked trunk of a tree that serves as 
a bridge high over a river teeming with crocodiles. Suppose 
I lose my compass in the deep grass, or forget to load my 
rifl.e and blunder into a rhinoceros trall in the jungle. If I 
am preoccupied with my thoughts, I may tread upon a 
puff-adder. At nightfall I forget to put on my mosquito­
boots in time, and eleven days later I die from an onset of 
tropical malaria. To forget to shut one's mouth while 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC .IIIAN r59 
bathing suffices to bring on a fatal attack of dysentery. 
For us a distracted state of mind is the natural cause of 
such accidents. For primitive man they are objectively 
conditioned omens, or sorcery. 
But 1t may be more than a question of inattention. In 
the K1toshi region south of Mount Elgon I went for an 
excursion into the Kabras forest There, in the tlu.ck grass, 
I nearly stepped on a puff-adder, and only managed to 
Jump away Just m tune In the afternoon my companion 
returned from a hunt, deathly pale and tremblmg m every 
limb. He had almost been bitten by a seven-foot mamba 
winch darted at Ins back from a temute hill Without a 
doubt he would have been killed had he not been able at 
the last moment to wound the anunal with a shot At 
nme o'clock that rught our camp was attacked by a pack 
of ravenous hyenas which had surpnsed. and mauled a man 
in Ins sleep the day before In spite of the fire they swarmed 
into the hut of our cook who fled screaming over the stockade 
Thenceforth there were no accidents throughout the whole 
of our Journey Such a day gave our negroes food for 
thought For us it was a sunple mulbphcabon of accidents, 
but for them the mevi.table fulftlment of an omen that had 
occurred upon the first day of our Journey into the wilds. 
It so happened that we had fallen, car, bridge and all, into 
a stream we were trymg to cross Our boys had exchanged 
glances on that occasion as if to say: " Well, that's a fine 
start." To cap the chm.ax a tropical thunderstorm blew up 
and soaked us so thoroughly that I was prostrated with 
fever for several days On the evening of the day when my 
friend had had such a narrow escape out bunting, I could 
not help saying to him as we white men sat looking at one 
another: "It seems to me as if the trouble had begun 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comI6o ARCHAIC MAN 
still further back. Do you remerober the dream you told 
me in Zurich just before we left ? " At that time be had 
had a very impressive nightmare. He dreamed that he 
was hunting in Africa, and was suddenly attacked by a 
huge mamba, so that he woke up with a cry of terror The 
dream had greatly disturbed him, and he now confessed to 
the thought that it had portended the death of ooe of us 
He had of comse assumed that I was to die, because we 
always hope it 1S the "other fellow". But it was he who 
later fell ill of a severe malanal lever that brought h,m to 
the •dB< of the grave. 
To read of such a conversation m. a comer of the world 
where there are no snakes and no malaria-bearing mosqwtoes 
means very httle One must imagme the velvety blue of 
a tropical night, the overhangu,g black masses of gigantic 
trees standing in a virgin forest, the mystenous vmces of 
the nocturnal spaces, a lonely :fire with loaded rifles stacked 
beSJ.de it, mosqwto-nets, boiled swamp-water to dnnk, and 
above all the conviction expressed by an old Alrikander 
who knew what he was saying. " T1us lSD't man's country­
it's God's country." There man is not king; it JS rather 
nature-the animals, plants and microbes. Given the mood 
that goes with the place, one understands how 1t is that we 
found a dawning sigmlicance in things that anywhere else 
would provoke a snule. That is the world of unrestrained, 
capricious powers with which primitive man has to deal 
day by day. The extraordmaiy event is no Joke to him. 
He draws Ins own conclusions. " It is not a good place " -
" The day is unfavourable "--and who knows what dangers 
he avoids by following such warnings ? 
"M"l!ic is the science of the jungle." A portent effects the 
inlDlediate modification of a course of action, the abandon-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 161 
ment of a planned undertaking, a change of psycltic atbtude. 
These are all lughly expedient reacbons in view of the fact 
that chance occurrences tend to fall in sequences and that 
prunitive man is wholly unconscious of psychic causality. 
Thanks to our one-sided emphasis upon so-called natmal 
causation, we have learned to distingulSh what is subjective 
and psychic from what is ob3ective and "natural", For 
prirmtlve man, on the contrary, the psychic and the objective 
coalesce m the external world. In the face of somethmg 
extraordmary 1t 1S not he who is astomshed, but rather the 
t1ung wluch 18 astonishing It lS mana-endowed with 
magic power. What we would call the powers of unagmation 
and suggestion seem to him invisible forces which act upon 
hun from WJ.thout. His country 1S neither a geographical 
nor a political entity It is that temtory which contains his 
mythology, !us rehg,.on, all his thinking and feeling III so fa, 
as he IS UDCOD8ClOUS of these functions His fear is localized 
m certain places that are " not good ". The spirits of the 
departed inhabit such or such a wood. That cave harbours 
devils which strangle any man who enters. In yonder 
mountam lives the great serpent , that hill is the grave of 
the legendary king , near thts spnng or rock or tree every 
woman becomes pregnant ; that ford is guarded by snake­
demons ; this towering tree has a v01ce that can call certain 
people. Prumbve man is unpsychological Psyclnc happen­
ings take place outside him m an obJectlve way. Even the 
thmgs he dreams about seem to h1m real ; that IS his only 
reason for paying attention to dreams. Our Elgonyi porters 
seriously mamtained that they never had dreams-only the 
sorcerer had them. When I questioned the sorcerer, he 
declared that he had stopped havmg dreams when the 
Bribsh entered the land. His father had sbll had " big " 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com162 ARCHAIC MAN 
dreams, he told me, and had known where the herds strayed, 
where the cows took their calves, and when there was going 
to be a war or a pestilence. It was now the District Com­
missioner who knew everything, and they knew nothing. 
He was as resigned as certain Papuans are who believe that 
the crocodiles have in good part gone over to the Bntish 
Government. It happened that a nallve convict had escaped 
from the authorities and been badly mangled by a crocodile 
while trying to cross a river. They therefore concluded that 
it must have been a police crocodile. God now speaks in 
dreams to the British, and not to the mechcine-man of the 
Elgonyi, he told me, because it is the British who have the 
powe, Dream activity had emigrated. Occasionally the 
souls of the natives enngra.te, and the medicine-man catches 
them in cages as :If they were butls ; or strange souls 
immigrate and cause diseases. 
This projection of psychic happenings naturally gives 
rise to relatwns between men and men, or between men and 
animals or things, that to us are inconcetvable A white 
man shoots a crocodile. At once a crowd of people come 
running from the nearest village and excitedly demand 
compensation. They explain that the crocodile was a 
certain old woman in their village who had died at the 
moment when the shot was fired. The crocodtle was 
obviously he, bush..aul. Anothe, man shot a leopa,d that 
was lying in wait for his cattle. Just then a woman died m 
a neighbouring village. She and the leopa,d we,e one and 
the same. 
Uvy-Briihl has coined the expression P•rli"pawm 
myshque for these curious relationships. It seems to me that 
the word "mystical" is not well chosen. Primitive man does 
not see anything mystical in these matters, but considers them 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC :MAN 
perfectly natural. It is only we who find anything strange 
about them, and the reason is that we seem to know nothing 
about such psychic phenomena.' In reality, however, they 
occur in us too, but we give them more civilized forms of 
expression. In daily hfe it happens all the time that we 
presume that the psychic processes of other people are the 
same as ours We suppose that what is p1easmg or desirable 
to us IS the same to others, and that what seems bad to us 
must also seem bad to them It is only of late that our 
courts of law have adopted a psychological standpoint and 
admitted the relativity of gwlt in pronouncing sentence 
Unsoplnsticated people are still moved to rancour by the 
tenet quod lsr.st Jmn non licet bmn. Equality before the law 
sttll represents a great human a.cluevement ; it has not yet 
been superseded And we still attnbute to " the other 
fellow " all the evil and infenor quahties that we do not 
hke to recognize in ourselves That is why we have to 
cntJ.cize and attack lum What happens in such a case, 
however, IS that an mferior "soul" emigrates from one 
person to another. The world IS still full of bites noires and 
of scapegoats, Just as it formerly teemed with witches and 
werewolves. 
Psychic proJectwn 1s one of the commonest facts of 
psychology It is the same as that particspat,on mystique 
which Levy-Bruhl remarked as a peculiar trait of primitive 
man. We merely give it another name. and as a rule deny 
that we are guilty of it. Everything that ,s unconscious in 
ourselves we discover in our neighbour. and we treat him 
a.ccordmgly. We no longer subJect him to the test of drinking 
poison ; we do not bum lum or put the screws on him ; but 
we injure him by means of moral verdicts pronounced with 
I I.,. d1810C1ation and projecti.on (Tnuu) 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
the deepest conviction. What we combat m him is usually 
our own inferior side. 
The simple truth is that primitive man is somewhat more 
given to projection than we because of the undifferentiated 
state of his mind and his consequent inability to cnticize 
himself. Everything to him ,s perfectly objective, and his 
language reflects tlus in a radical way. With a touch of 
humour we can picture to ourselves a leopard woman. We 
often represent a person as a goose, a cow. a hen, a snake, 
an ox, or an ass As uncomphmentary epithets these images 
are familiar to us all. But when pnmitlve man attributes 
a bush-<oul to a person, the polSOil of the moral verdict is 
absent. Archa.Jc man JS too naturalistic for that , he JS too 
much impressed by things as they are to pass Judgement 
readtly, and is therefore much less prone to do so than we. 
The Pueblo Indians declared m a matter-of-fact way that I 
belonged to the Bear Totem-in other words, that I was a 
bear-because I did not come down a ladder frontwards 
like a man, but backwards, using my hands like a bear. If 
a European said that I had the nature of a bear this would 
come to much the same thing, with perhaps a slightly different 
shade of meaning The theme of the bush-soul, which ~ 
so strange when we meet with it in primitive societies, has 
become with us, hke so much else, a mere figure of speech. 
If we take our metaphors in a concrete way we return to a 
primitive point of view. For instance we have the medical 
expression to " handle a patient ". In concrete terms this 
means to Jay the hands upon-to work at with the hands. 
And this is precisely what the medicine-man does with his 
patients 
We find the bush-soul ham to understand because we ue 
baffled by such a concrete way of looking at things. We 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN I65 
cannot conceive of a " soul " as an entity that emigrates and 
takes up 1ts abode in a wild ammal When we describe 
someone as an a.ss, we do not mean that he is m every respect 
the quadruped called an ass. We mean that he resembles 
aD ass in some particular respect. As far as the person in 
question is concerned, we isolate a part of his personality or 
psyche and concrebze this part of him m the image of an 
ass. So, for primitive man, the leopard-woman is a human 
bemg, and only her bush-soul is a leopard. Since all un­
conscwus psychic life is concrete and obJective for archaic 
man, he supposes that a person descnbable as a leopard bas 
the soul of a leopard. If the concretizing goes further, he 
assumes that such a soul lives in the bush in the form of a 
real leopard 
These identifications, brought about by the projection of 
psychic happenings, create a world in which man IS contained 
not only physically, but psychically as well To a certiun 
extent he coalesces with it. In no way IS he master of tlus 
world, but rather its component Pnmib.ve man, m Mrica 
for instance, is still far from the glorification of human 
powers. He does not dream of regardmg hunse1f as the lord 
of creation. His zoological classification does not culminate 
in homo sap,ens, but in the elephant. Next comes the lion, 
then the python or the crocodile, then man and the lesser 
beings. It never oocurs to bun that he might be able to rule 
nature ; it is civilized man who strives to dominate nature 
and therefore devotes !us greatest efforts to the discovery of 
natural causes which will give mm the key to nature's secret 
laboratory. That is why he strongly resentz the idea of 
arbitrary powers and denies them Their existence would 
amount to proof that his attempt to dominate nature is 
futile after all. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comx66 ARCHAIC MAN 
Summing up, we may say th&t the outstanding trait of 
archaic man 15 his attitude towards the capriciousness of 
cha.nee which he considers a far more important factor m 
cosmic happening than natural causes Chance occurrences 
have two aspects ; on the one band 1t is • fact that they 
tend to take pla,e in series, and on the other that they 
are endowed with an •-t purposefulness through the 
projection of unconscious psyclu.c contents-in other words 
by "pa,tu;,pation myst,qwe ". Arcluuc man, to be sure, 
does not draw this dtstinction, for he projects psychic 
happerungs so completely th•t they coalesce with phymc&I 
events. An accident seems to him to be an arbitrary and 
intentional act-an interference by an animated bemg­
because he does not rea.hze that unusual events move him 
only in so far as he invests them with the force of his own 
astonishment or fear. Here, it ts true, we move on treacherous 
ground. Is a thing beaut:J.ful because I attnbute beauty to 
it ;i It is well known that great minds have wrestled with 
the question whether it is the glonous sun that illumines the 
worlds, or whether it is the human eye by VJrtue of its relation 
to the sun. Archaic man beheves 1t to be the sun, and 
civilized man believes it is the eye-so far, at any rate, as 
he reflects at all and does not suffer from the disease of 
poets. He must strip nature of psychic attnbutes m order 
to dominate it ; to see his world objectively he must take 
back all bis arcluuc projections. 
In the priminve world everything has psycluc qualities. 
Everything is endowed with the elements of man's psyche 
-or let us say, of the human psyche, of the collective un­
conscious, for there is as yet no individual psychic life. Let 
us not forget, in this connection, that what the Christian 
sacrament of baptism purports to do is of the greatest 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
importance for the psychic development of mankind 
Baptism endows the human bemg with a unique soul I 
do not mean, of course, the bapbsmal rite in itself as a 
magical act that is effective at one performance. I mean 
that the idea of baptism hits a man out of lus archaic 
identification with the world and changes him into a being 
who stands above 1t. The fact that mankind has risen to 
the Jevel of this idea is baptism in the deepest sense, for it 
means the birth of spiritual man who transcends nature. 
It is an axiom m the study of the unconscious that every 
relatively mdependent, psycluc content 1S personified when­
ever the opportunity anses. We find the clearest instances 
of this m the hallucmatlons of the insane and in medumusbc 
communicat10ns. An mVlSlble person anses wherever and 
whE'Ilevet an autonomous psyclnc component is proJected 
This explains the spuitsof anordmary spmtuahstlc9eanceand 
the ghosts which appear to primitive man. If an rmportant 
psyclnc content is projected upon a human bemg, he becomes 
mana:-that is, endowed with the power of producing unusual 
effects. He or she becomes a sorcerer, a witch, a werewolf, 
or the hlce. The pnm1t1ve belief that the medicine-man 
catches the souls that have wandered away by mght and 
puts them into cages hke buds, strikingly illustrates this. 
Psychic proJectJ.ons endow the medu:ine-man with mana • 
they cause arumals, trees and stones to speak , because they 
are psycluc activities, they compel the individual to obey 
them. For this reason an insane person is hopelessly at the 
mercy of his VO!CeS. That which is proJected is Ins own 
psychic activity Without knowing it, he is the one who 
speaks through his voices, just as he is the one who hears, 
sees and obeys. 
From the psychological point of view, primitive man's 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com168 ARCHAIC MAN 
belief that the arbitrary power of chance answers to the 
mtentrons of spuits and of sorcerers is perfectly natural, 
because it 1S an unavoidable inference from the facts as he 
sees them. And let us not delude ourselves m this connection. 
If we explain our scientific views to an intelligent native 
he will credit us with a ludicrous superstitiousness and a 
disgraceful want of logic He beheves that the world 1S 
lighted by the sun, and not by the human eye. My friend 
Mountain Lake, a Pueblo chief, once called me sharply to 
account because I had given voice to the Augustim.an tenet . 
Non est hie sol Donnnus noste,,, sed q,n sUum feed. Pointing 
to the sun, he declared incbgnantly · " He who goes there 
1S our father. You can see him From him comes all hght, 
all life--there is nothing that he has not made " He became 
greatly excited, struggled for words, and finally exclaimed · 
" Even a man in the mountains who goes alone cannot 
make hlS fire without h101." The archaic standpoint can 
hardly be more beautdully expressed than by these words. 
The power that rules us comes from the external world, and 
through it alone are we pemutted to live. With us, rehglous 
thought still keeps alive the archaJ.c state of mind, even 
though our tune is bereft of gods. Untold mtlhons of people 
still think m this wsy. 
In spea.kmg of primitive man's outlook upon the caprice 
of chance, I expressed the view that this attitude serves a 
purpose, and therefore has a meaning. Shall we, for the 
moment at least, venture the hypothesis that the primitive 
belief in arbitrary powers is justified by the facts and not 
merely from a psychological point of view ? This sounds 
alarming, but I have no mtention of jumping from the 
frying-pan into the fire and trying to prove that witchcraft 
actually exists. I wish only to consider the conclusions to 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN I6g 
which we shall be led if we follow primitive man in supposing 
that all bght comes from the sun, that things are beautiful 
in themselves and that a human part-soul ts a leopard. In 
doing tlns we accept the primitive idea of ma:na. Accord.mg 
to thJs idea, the beautiful moves m, and it is not we who 
create beauty A certain person ss a devil-we have not 
projected our own evil upon Jnm and in tlus way made a 
dev:tl out of him. There are people--mana personahties­
who are impressive m their own nght, and in no way thanks 
to our imagination. The mane conception has 1t that there 
eXISts something hke a widely distnbuted force in the 
external world that produces all those effects which are out 
of the common Everything that exists, acts, for otherwise 
it would not be actual. It is only actual thanks to its 
inherent energy Being is a field of force The pnmitive 
numa: conception, as we can see, is of the nature of a crude 
theory of energy 
So far we can easily follow tlus prinutive idea The 
difficulty arises when we try to carry its 1111.plicat10ns further, 
for they reverse the process of psycluc projecboo of wluch I 
have spoken These 1111.plications are as follows : it is not 
my imaginahon or my awe that makes a sorcerer of the 
mecb.cine-man , on the contrary, he 1s a sorcerer and projects 
his magical powers upon me Ghosts are not hallucmattons 
of my mind, but appear to me of their own volition Al­
though such statements are logical denvatives of the ,,._. 
idea, we hesitate to accept them and begin to look around 
us for our comfortable theory of psychic projectioo The 
questioo is nothing less than tlus : does the psychic in 
general-that IS, the spirit, or the unconscious-arise in us ; 
or is the psyche, in the early stages of consciousness, actually 
outside us in the fonn of arbitrary powers with intentions of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
their own, and does it gradually come to take its place 
within us in the course of psychu: development;, Were 
the dissociated psychic contents-to use our modem term.s­
ever parts of the psyches of mdividuals, or were they rather 
from the beginmng psychic entities eXJSting in themselves 
according to the primitive VJ.eW as ghosts, ancestral spirits 
and the hke 1 Were they only by degrees embodied by man 
in the course of development, so that they gradually con­
stituted in him that world which we now ca.11 the psyche ? 
This whole idea strikes us as dangerously paradoXJcal, and 
yet we are able to conceive something of the kmd Not 
only the religious teacher, but the pedagogue as well, assumes 
that it 1S possible to implant m the human psyche something 
that was not previously there. The power of suggestion and 
mfluence is a fact , even the most modern behaviounsm 
expects far-reachmg results from this quarter. The idea of 
a complicated building-up of the psyche is expressed in 
pnmitive form m many widespread behefs-for mstance, 
possession, the incarnation of ancestral spui.ts, the 1m­
mJgration of souls, and so forth When someone sneezes, 
we still say · " God bless you ", and mean by 1t • " I hope 
your new soul wJll do you no hann " When in the course 
of our own development we grow out of many-sided con­
trachctions and achieve a unuied personabty, we experience 
something hke a complicated growing-together of the 
psyche. Smee the human body IS bwlt up by inheritance 
out of a number of Mendelian units, it does not seem 
altogether out of the question that the human psyche is 
similarly put together, 
The matenalistic views of our day have a tendency which 
we can discern in archaic thought. Both lead to the conclu­
sion that the individual is a mere resultant ; in the first 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
case, he is the resultant of natural causes. and in the second. 
of chance occurrences. According to both accounts, human 
inchviduahty is notlung m its own nght, but rather the 
accidental product of forces contamed in the objective 
environment. Tlus is through and through the archaic 
conception of the world accordmg to which the single human 
being is never considered unique. but always interchangeable 
with any other and easJly dispensable. By way of a narrow 
view of causahty, modem matenalism has returned to the 
standpoint of archaic man But the materialist is more 
radical, because he lS more systematic, than primitive man. 
The latter has the advantage of being inconsistent , he 
makes an exception of the mana personality. In the course 
of history these mana personalities were exalted to the 
pos1tion of divme figures , they became heroes and kings 
who shared m the :unrnortahty of the gods by eating of their 
re1uvenatmg food This idea of the immortality of the 
md1vtdual and of his imperishable worth is to be found in 
prunitive societies, first of all m the belief in ghosts, and then 
m myths of the age when death had not yet gained an entrance 
mto the world through human carelessness or folly. 
Prumtive man is not aware of tins contradiction in his 
views. Our negro porters assured me that they had no 
idea what would happen to them after death According 
to them a man is simply dead , he does not breathe any 
longer, and the corpse is carried into the bush where the 
hyenas eat it. That is wha.t they tlunk about it by day, 
but the night teems with the spirits of the dead who bring 
diseases to cattle and man, who attack and strangle the 
nocturnal traveller and indulge in other forms of violence. 
The primitive mind 18 full of such contradictions They 
could wony a European out of his skm, and it would never 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
occur to him that something qwte simJlar is to be found in 
our civilized midst. We have universities where the idea 
of divine mtervention is considered beneath dispute-but 
where theology is a part of the cumculum. A research 
worker in natural science may hold 1t obscene to attribute 
the smallest variation of an animal species to an act of God, 
but may have another drawer in his mind in which he keeps 
a lull-blown Christian faith which he likes to pamde on 
Sundays. Why should we exate ourselves about prumt1ve 
incollSlStency ? 
It is not possible to derive any philosophical system from 
the elementary thoughts of pnmitlve man. They fumtSb. 
us only with antmomies And yet it is Just these which are 
the inexhaustible source of all mental effort and provide the 
problems of thought m all bmes and m all c1V1hzations 
Are the ., collective representations " of archaic man really 
profound, or do they only seem so ;, I cannot answer tins 
most dJ.fficult of questions, but I can tell of an observation 
which I made among the mountam tnbe of the Elgonyi. 
I searched and enqmred far and wide for traces of rehglous 
ideas and ceremomes, and for weeks on end I discovered 
nothing. The natives let me see everything and were free 
with their information. I could talk with them without the 
hindrance of an interpreter, for many of the old men spoke 
Swahili. At first they were reluctant enough, but when the 
ice was broken, I was cordially received. They knew nothing 
of religious customs. But I never gave up, and finally, at 
the close of one of many fruitless palavers, an old man 
exclaimed : " In the morning, when the sun comes up, we 
leave our huts, spit in our hands, and hold them up to the 
sun." I got them to perfonn the ceremony for me and 
descnbe it exactly. They hold their hands before their 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comARCHAIC MAN 
mouths and spit or blow into them vigorously. Then they 
tum their hands round and hold the palms toward the sun. 
I asked them the mea.rung of what they did-why they blew 
or spat in their hands. My question was futile. " That 1S 
how it has always been dooe ", they sald It was unpossible 
to get an explanation, and I was perfectly convinced that 
they knew ooly what they did, and not why they did it 
They see no meaning in their action. They greet the new 
moon with the same gestures 
Let us suppose that I am a total stranger m Zunch and 
have come to tlus aty to explore the customs of the place. 
First I settle down in the outsku1:s near some suburban 
homes, and come mto neighbourly contact with their owners. 
I then say to Messrs Muller and Meyer · '" Please tell me 
something about your rehgwus customs." Both gentlemen 
are taken aback. They never go to church, know nothing 
about 1t, and emphatically deny that they practise any such 
customs. One morning I surpnse Mr Muller at a cunous 
occupatlon He 1S busily runnmg about the garden, hiding 
coloured eggs and setting up pecuhar rabbit idols. I have 
caught him ,n ftag,-ante del,cto. " Why cbd you conceal this 
lughly mteresting ceremony from me > " I ask hun. " What 
ceremony 1 " he retorts. " Tins is nothmg Everybody 
does thts at Easterb.me "' " But what 1S the meaning of 
these idols and eggs-and why do you hide them 1 " Mr. 
Muller 1S stunned. He does not know, and Jost as little does 
he know the meaning of the Christmas-tree. And yet he 
does these things. He is just hlce prumtive man. Did the 
distant ancestors of the Elgonyi know what they chd ? It 
is highly unprobable Archaic man does what he does-and 
only civilized man knows what he does. 
What is the meamng of the Elgonyi ceremony just cited ? 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com174 ARCHAIC MAN 
Clearly it is an offering to the sun which for these natives is 
mtfflC#-that is, numa:, or divine-only at the moment of 
rising. If they have spittle on their hands, this is the 
substance which, according to primitive behef, contruns the 
personal mana:, the force that cures, conjures and sustams 
life. If they breathe upon their hands, breath 1s wind and 
spirit-it is ,-oho, in Arabic n,ch, in Hebrew mach, and in 
Greek jnlefmul. The action means : I offer my living spirit 
to God. It is a wordless, acted prayer, wluch could equally 
well be spoken " Lord, into thy hands I commend my 
spirit." Does this merely happen so, or was tlus thought 
already incubated and purposed before man existed ? I 
must leave this question unanswered. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comVlll 
PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
IT is obvious enough that psychology, being the study of 
psychic processes, can be brought to bear upon the study of 
hterature, for the human psyche is the womb of all the 
sciences and arts. We may expect psychological research, 
on the one hand, to explain the formation of a work of art, 
and on the other to reveal the fa.et.ors that make a person 
artistically creative The psychologist is thus faced with 
two separate and distinct tasks, and must approach them 
in radically different ways. 
In the case of the work of art we have to deal with a 
product of complicated psychic activities-but a product 
that is apparently inten'b.onal and consciously shaped In 
the case of the artist we must deal with the psychic apparatus 
itself. in the first instance we must attempt the psychological 
analysis of a definitely circumscribed and concrete artistic 
achievement, wmle in the second we must analyse the 
living and creative human being as a unique personality. 
Although these two underta.kmgs are closely related and even 
interdependent, neither of them can yreld the explanations 
that are sought by the other. It is of course possible to 
draw inferences about the artist from the work of art, and 
fllCt! versa, but these inferences are never conclusive. At 
best they are probable surmises or lucky guesses. A know­
ledge of Goethe's particular relatwn to his mother throws 
z75 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comr76 PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
some light upon Faust's exclamation : " The mothers­
mothers-how very strange 1t sounds I " But it does not 
enable us to see how the attachment to his mother could 
produce the Faust drama it.self, however unmistakably we 
sense in the man Goethe a deep connection between the 
two Nor are we more su.ccessfuJ. in reasoning in the reverse 
direction. There is nothing in The Ru,g of the N,1,,Jungs 
that would enable us to recognize or definitely infer the fact 
that Wai:ner occasionally hked to wear womaru.sh clothes, 
though hidden connections exist between the heroic masculine 
world of the Nibelungs and a certain pathologu:al efleminacy 
in the man Wagner. 
The present state of development of psychology does not 
allow us to estabhsh those rigorous causal connections wlnch 
we expect of a sctence. It 1S only m the realm of the psycho­
physiological instincts and reB.exes that we can confidently 
operate with the idea of causahty. From the point where 
psychic hie begins-that IS, at a level of greater complexity 
-the psychologist must content himself with more or less 
widely ranging descnpt10ns of happerungs and with the 
vivid portrayal of the warp and weft of the nund in all its 
amazing mtricacy. In doing tblS, he must relram from 
designating any one psychic process, taken by itself, as 
" necessary ". Were th,s not the state of affairs, and could 
the psychologist be rehed upon to uncover the causal connec­
tions within a work of art and in the process of artistic 
creation, he would leave the study of art no ground to stand 
on and would reduce 1t to a special branch of his own science. 
The psychologist, to be sure, may never abandon his claun 
to investigate and establish causal relations m complicated 
psychic events. To do so would be to deny psychology the 
right to exist. Yet he can never make good this claim 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 177 
in the fullest sense, because the creative aspect of life which 
finds its clearest expression in art baffles all attempts at 
rational formulation. Any reaction to stimulus may be 
causally explained ; but the creative act, which is the 
absolute antithesis of mere reaction, will for ever elude the 
human understanding. It can only be described in its 
manifestations ; it can be obscurely sensed, but never 
wholly grasped. Psychology and the study of art will always 
have to tum to one another for help, and the one will not 
invalidate the other It IS an important pnnc1ple of 
psychology that psychic events are denvable. It is a 
pnnciple in tbe study of art tbat a psychic product is some­
thing in and for itself-whether the work of art or the 
artist himself IS in question Both princtples are valid in 
spite of their relativity 
THE WORK OF ART 
There is a fundamental difference of approach between the 
psychologist's examination of a literary work, and that of 
the htera.ry critic. What is of decisive 1m.portance and 
value for the latter may be quite irrelevant for the former. 
Literary products of highly dubious merit are often of the 
greatest interest to the psychologist. For instance, the 
so-called '' psychological novel '' is by no means as rewarding 
for the psychologist as tbe literaiy-mmded suppose. Con­
sidered as a whole, such a novel explains ihelf. It has done 
its own work of psychological mterpretation, and the 
psychologist can at most criticize or enlarge upon this. The 
important question as to how a. particular author came to 
write a particular novel is of coune left unanswered, but I 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comI78 PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
wish to reserve this general problem for the second part of 
my essay. 
The nowls wbkh are most fruitful IOI the psychologist are 
those in which the author has not already given a psycho­
logical interpretation of his characters, and which therefore 
leave room for analysis and explanation, or even invite it by 
thou: mode of presentation. Good examples of this kind of 
writing are the novels of Benoit, and English ficbon in the 
manner of Rider Haggard, mcludmg the vein exploited by 
Conan Doyle wbkh yields that most chenshed arbcle of 
mass-production, the detective story Melville's Moby D,ck, 
which I consider the greatest American novel, also comes 
within this class of writmgs. An excihng narrabve that is 
apparently qwte devoid of psychological exposition is just 
what interests the psychologist most of all Such a tale is 
built upon a groundwork of implicit psychological assump­
tions, and, in the measure that the author ts unconscious of 
them, they reveal theIDSelves, pure and unalloyed, to the 
critical discernment. In the psychological novel, on the 
other hand, the authOI himself attempts to reshape his 
matenal so as to raise it from the level of crude contingency 
to that of psychological exposibon and illumination-a 
procedure which all too often clouds the psychological sig­
nificance of the work OI hides it from view. It is precisely to 
novels of this SOit that the layman goes IOI "psychology", 
while 1t is novels of the other kind that challenge the 
psychologist, IOI he alone can give them deeper meaning. 
I have been speaking in terms of the novel, but I am dealing 
with a psychological fact wbkh is not restricted to this 
particulaI fDim of liteiaiy art. We meet with it in the works 
of the poets as well, and are confronted with it when we com­
pare the first and second parts of the Faust drama. The 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE x79 
love-tragedy of Gretchen explains itself , there is nothing 
that the psychologist can add to it that the poet has not 
already said in better words. The second part, on the other 
hand, calls for explanation. The prodigious richness of the 
imagmative matenal has so overtaxed the poet's formative 
powers that nothing is self-<>Xplanatory and every verse adds 
to the reader's need of an interpretation The two parts of 
Faint illustrate by way of extremes thm psychological 
distinction between works of literature 
In order to emphasize the dist:inctwn, I will call the one 
mode of artistic creat:J.on psychologf,cal, and the other 
rnnonary. The psychologlca.l mode deals with matenals 
drawn from the realm of human consclousness--for instance, 
with the lessons of hfe, with emotional shocks, the expenence 
of passion aod the cmes of human destiny ID general-all of 
wluch go to make up the conscious life of man, and lus feeling 
life ID particular. ThIS matenal is psyclncally assinulated 
by the poet, raised from the commonplace to the level of 
poetic experience, and given an expression which forces the 
readex to greater clanty and depth of human insight by 
bnnging fully mto lus coOSC1ousness what he ordinanly 
evades and overlooks or senses only with a feehng of dull 
discomfort The poet's work is an interpretatwn and 
illumination of the contents of consaousness, of the in­
eluctable expenences of human life with its eternally re­
current sorrow and Joy. He leaves nothmg over for the 
psychologist, unless, 1Ddeed, we expect the latter to expound 
the reasons for which Faust falls in love with Gretchen. or 
which dnve Gretchen to murder her child! Such themes go 
to make up the lot of humankind ; they repeat themselves 
millions of times and are respoI1S1ble for the monotony of 
the ~ and of the penal code. No obscurity 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com18o PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
whatever surrounds them, for they fully explain them­
selves. 
Countless literary works belong to this class : the many 
novels dealing with love, the environment, the family, 
crime and society, as well as didactic poetry, the larger 
number of lyrics, and the drama, both tragic and comic. 
Whatever its particular form may be, the psychological 
work of art always takes its matenals from the vast realm 
of conscious human experience-from the vivid foreground 
of life, we might say I have called this mode of artistic 
creation psychological because in its activity it nowhere 
uanscends the bounds of psycbolog1cal intelligibility. Every­
thing that it embraces-the expenence as well as its artistic 
expression-belong> to the reahn of the understandable 
Even the basic experiences themselves, though non-rational, 
have nothing strange about them; on the contrary, they 
are that which has been koown from the begmrung of tune­
passion and its fated outcome, man's subjection to the turns 
of destiny, eternal nature with its beauty and its horror. 
The profound difference between the first and second pails 
of F•U marks the difference between the psychological and 
the visionary modes of artistic creation. The latter reverses 
all the conditions of the former. The experience that 
furnishes the material for artistic expression is no longer 
familiar. It is a strange something that derives its existence 
from the hinterland of man's mind-that suggests the abyss 
of time separating us from pre-human ages, or evokes a 
super-human world of contrasting light and daikoess. It is 
a primordial experience which surpasses man's understanding, 
and to which he is therefore in danger of succumbing. The 
value and the force of the experience are given by its enor­
mity. It arises from timeless depths ; it is fureign and cold, 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 181 
many-sided, demomc and grotesque. A grunly ridiculous 
sample of the eternal chaos-a cnmen laesaa ma1~suitis 
htffllaflU, to use Nietzsche's words-it bursts asunder our 
human standards of value and of a:sthetic form The dis-, 
turbmg vision of monstrous and meaningless happenings 
that in every way exceed the grasp of humao feeling and 
comprehension makes quite other demands upon the powers 
of the artist than do the expenences of the foreground of 
bfe. These never rend the curtain that veils the cosmos ; 
they never transcend the bounds of the humanly poss1ble, 
and for tlus reason are readily shaped to the demands of art, 
no matter how great a shock to the individual they may be. 
But the primordial experiences rend from top to bottom the 
curtain upon wluch is pa.mted the picture of an ordered 
world, and allow a glimpse into the unfathomed abyss of 
what has not yet become. Is it a vision of other worlds, or 
of the obscuration of the spirit, or of the beginning of things 
before the age of man, or of the unborn generations of the 
future ;i We cannot say that it is any or none of these 
Shaping-re-shaping-
The eternal spirit's eternal pastime 1 
We find such vision in The Sllepherrl of Hennas, in Dante, 
in the second part of Faust, in Nietzsche's Dionysian 
exuberance, m Wagner's N,belung...,.ng, in Spitteler's 
OIY,,,P,scher FrMhl,ng, in the poetry of William Blake, in 
the lpne,otonuichsa of the monk Francisco Colonna, and in 
Jacob Boehme's philosophic and poetic stammerings. In a 
more restricted and specitic way, the primordial expesience 
furnishes material for Rider Haggard in the fichon-cycle 
I Ga""""'6, U,,,,.,Uflftntg, 
Da nlpw S10,s ,111'p U,stM'lu,lltff16 (Goethe.) 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comrS. PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
that turns upon She, and it does the same for Benoit, chielly 
in L'Atlantuu, for Kubm m Dte Antlete Seue, for Meynnk in 
Das GrM.,. G,s,cM-a book whose importance we should 
not undervalue-for Goetz m Das Rnch olme Raom, and for 
Barlach m Der Tole Tag. Tills hst might be greatly extended. 
In dealing with the psychological mode of arl1Stlc creatloo, 
we never need ask ourselves what the matenal consists of 
or wha.t it means. But this question forces itself upon us as 
soon as we come to the visionary mode of creatwn We are 
astonished, taken aback, confused, put on our guard or even 
disgusted-and we demand commentaries and explanatwns. 
We are reminded in nothmg of everyday, hwnan hfe, but 
rather of dreams, night-time fean, and the dark recesses of 
the mind that we somebm.es sense with misgivmg. The 
reading pubhc for the most part repudl&tes this kind of 
writillg--unless, indeed, it is ooarsely sensatioual-and even 
the hterary critic feels embarrassed by it. It is true that 
Dante and Wagner have smoothed the approach to 1t. The 
visionary experience is cloaked, in Dante's case, by the 
introduction of historical facts, and, in that of Wagner, by 
mythological events-so that history and mythology are 
sometimes taken to be the materials with which these poets 
worked. But with neJ.ther of them does the moving force 
and the deeper sigruficance lie there. For both it is con­
tained in the visionary experience. Rlller Haggard, pardon­
ably enough, lS generally held to be a mere inventor of 
fiction. Yet even with lum the story is pnmarily a means 
of giving expres6lOll to significant matenal. However much 
the tale may seem to overgrow the cooteot, the latter 
outweighs the former in importance. 
The obscanty as to the sources of the material in visionary 
creatinn is very strange, and the exact opposite of what we 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE x83 
find in the psychological mode of creation. We are even 
led to suspect that this obscurity is not unintentional. We 
are naturally inclmed to suppose-and Freudian psychology 
encourages us to do so-that some lughly personal expenence 
underlies tins grotesque darkness. We hope thus to explain 
these strange glimpoes of chaos and to understand why it 
sometunes seems as though the poet had intentionally con­
cealed Ins baS1c experience from us. It is only a step from 
tlus way of looking at the matter to the statement that we 
are here deahng with a pathological and neurotic art-a. 
step which is JUSbfied in so far as the material of the V1Si.onary 
creator shows certain traits that we find in the fan.tames of 
the insane The converse also JS true ; we often discover 
m the mental output of psychotic persons a wealth of mean.­
mg that we should expect rather from the works of a gemus. 
The psychologist who follows Freud will of course be mchned 
to take the writings in question as a problem in pathology. 
On the assumption that an jntimate, personal expenence 
underhes what I call the '' primordial vision ''-an ex­
perience, that is to say, whk:b. caDDot be accepted by the 
conscious outlook-he will try to account for the curious 
images of the vision by calhng them covex-figures and by 
supposmg that they represent an attempted concealment of 
the basic experience. This, according to his view, might be 
an experience in love which is morally or asthetically 
incompatible with the personahty as a whole or at least 
with certain fictions of the conscious mind. In order that 
the poet, through his ego, migbt repress this experience and 
make it unrecognir.able (unconscious), the whole arsenal of 
a pathological fantasy was brought into action. Moreover, 
this attempt to replace reality by fiction, being unsatisfactory, 
must be repeated in a long series of creative embodiments. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comIl!.4 PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
This would explain the prohferation of imaginative forms, all 
mODStrous, demonic, grotesque and perverse. On the one 
hand they are subsbtutes for the unacceptable experience, 
and on the other they help to conceal 1t. 
Although a discussion of the poet's personality and psycbi,: 
disposition belongs strictly to the secood psrt of my essay, I 
cannot avoid talang up in the present connection this 
Freudian view of the VJSi.onary work of art For one thing, 
it has aroused considerable attention. And then 1t is the 
only well-known attempt that has been ma.de to give a 
" scientific " explanatJ.on of the sources of the visionary 
material or to formulate a theory of the psychic processes 
that underlie this curious mode of artistic creation. I 
assume that my own view of the queshon 1s not well known 
or geoerally undenitood. With this pre1imwary remark, I 
will now try to present it briefly. 
If we insist on deriving the V1SJ.on from a personal ex­
perience, we must treat the former as something secondary­
as a mere substitute for reality. The result is that we strip 
the vision of its primordial quality and take it as nothmg but 
a symptom. The pf081UU1t chaos theo shrinks to the pro­
portions of a psychic chsturbaoce. With tlus accouot of 
the matter we feel reassured. and tum again to our picture 
of a well-ordered cosmos. Since we are practical and 
reasonable, we do not expect the cosmos to be perfect ; we 
accept these unavmdable imperfections which we call 
abnormalities and diseases, and we take it for granted that 
human nature is not exempt from them. The frighteniog 
revelation of abysses that defy the human underatandiDg is 
dismissed as illusioo, and the poet is regarded as a victim and 
petpe!Iator of deception. Even to the poet, his primordial 
experience was " human-all too human ", to such a degree 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 185 
that he could not face its meaning but had to conceal it 
from himself. 
We shall do well, I think, to make fully exphcit all the 
implica.b.ons of that way of accounting for artistic creation 
which COllSISts in reducmg it to personal factors. We should 
see clearly where it leads. The troth is that it takes us away 
from the psychological study of the work of art, and confronts 
us with the psycluc dispomtion of the poet hnnself. That 
the latter presents an important problem is not to be denied, 
but the work of art is somethmg in its own nght, and may 
not be conjured away. The question of the sjgnificance to 
the poet of lus own creative work-of his regarding it as a 
trifle, as a screen, as a source of suffenng or as an achieve­
ment-does not concern us at the moment, our task being 
to interpret the work of art psychologically For this 
undertaking it is essential that we give senous consideration 
to the basic expenence that underlies it-namely, to the 
vision. We must take 1t at least as seriously as we do the 
expenences that underlie the psychological mode of artistic 
creatwn, and no one doubts thst they are both real and 
senous It looks, mdeed, as 1f the visionary experience were 
something quite apart from the ordinary lot of man, and for 
this reason we have difficulty in believing that it is real. It 
has about it an unfortunate suggestion of obscure meta­
phymcs and of occultum, so that we feel called upon to 
intervene in the name of a well-mtentioned reasonableness. 
Our conclusion is that it would be better not to take such 
things too seriously, rest the world revert again to a be­
nighted superstition. We may, of course, have a predilection 
for the occult ; but ordinarily we dismiss the visionary 
experience as the outcome of a rich fantasy or of a poetic 
mood-thst is to say, as a kind of poetic licence psycho-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comI86 PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
logi<ally understood. Certain of the poets encourage this 
interpretation m order to put a wholesome distance between 
themselves and their work. Spitteler, for example, stoutly 
maintained tha.t it was one and the same whether the poet 
SIIDll of an Olympian Spring or to the theme : " May is 
here I " The truth is that poets are human beings. and that 
what a poet has to say about his work is often far from being 
the most illwmnating word on the sub1ect. What is required 
of us, theo, is nothing less than to defend the importance of 
the visionary expenence against the poet hunself. 
It cannot be denied that we catch the reverberations of 
an initial love-<0xperience in Tiu Siupherd of Hmnas, in the 
Dsvs,u Com&ly and m the FtNSI drama-an experience 
winch is completed and fulfilled by the vision. There is no 
grouod for the assumption that the second part of F•wsl 
repudiates or conceals the normal, human experience of the 
first part, nor are we Justified in supposing that Goethe was 
normal at the tune when he wrote Part I, but ma neurotic 
state of mind when he composed P•rl 11 Hennas, Dante 
and Goethe can be taken as three steps m a sequence covering 
nearly two thousand years of human development, and in 
each of them we find the personal Jove.episode not only 
connected with the weightier visionary experieoce, but 
frankly subordinated to it. On the strength of this evidence 
which is furnished by the work of art itself and which throws 
out of court the question of the poet's particular psychic 
dispomtion, we must admit that the vision represents a 
deeper and more impressive experience than human passion. 
In works of art of this nature-and we must never confuse 
them with the artist as a person-we cannot doubt that the 
vision is a genuine, primordial experieru:e, regardless of 
wha.t reason-mongers may say. The vision is not something 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 187 
derived or secondary, and it is not a symptom of somethiDg 
else. It is true symbolic expression-that is, the expression 
of something existent m its own right, but IIDperfectly known. 
The love-episode ,s a real experience really sulfeied, and the 
same statement apphes to the vision. We need not try to 
determine whetheI the content of the vision is of a physical, 
psychic or metaphysical nature. In itself it has psychic 
reality, and this is no less real than physical reality. Human 
pass1on falls within the sphere of CODSC10US experience, 
while the subject of the vision lies beyond 1t. Through our 
feehngs we experience the known, but our intuitions pmnt 
to thmgs that are unknown and hidden-that by their very 
nature are secret. If ever they become conSC10us, they are 
intentionally kept back and concealed, for which reason they 
have been regarded from earliest times as mysterious, 
uncanny and deceptive. They are hidden from the scrutiny of 
man, and he also hides hunself lrom them out of <ie,sula,. 
monui He protects hunse1f with the slueld of science and the 
annour of reason. His enhghtenment is born of fear; m the 
day-bme he believes in an ordered cosmos, and he tries to 
maintain this laith against the fear of chaos that besets him 
by night What if there were some hvmg force whose sphere 
of action lies beyond our world of every day 7 Are there 
human needs that are dangerous and unavoidable 1 Is 
there something more purposeful than electrons 1 Do we 
delude ourselves in tlnnkmg that we possess and command 
our own souls ;i And lS that which science calls the '' psyche •• 
not merely a question-mark arbitrarily confined within the 
skull, but rather a door that opeos upon the human world 
from a world beyond, now and again allowing strange and 
unseizable potencies to act upon man and to remove him, as 
if upon the wings of the night, from the level of common 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comzBB PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATIJRE 
humanity to that of a more than personal vocation ;i When 
we consider the visionary mode of artistic creation, 1t even 
seems as If the love-episode had served as a mere release­
as if the personal experience were nothing but the p,e!ude 
to the all-important " divine comedy ". 
It is not alone the creator of this kmd of art who is in 
touch with the mght-side of life, but the seers, prophets, 
leaders and enlighteners also. However dark this nocturnal 
world may be, it is not wholly unfamiliar. Man has known 
of it from time immemorial-here, there, and everywhere ; 
for primitive man today it is an unquestronable part of his 
picture of the cosmos. It 1S only we who have repudiated it 
because of our fear of supers'b.tJ.on and metaphysics, and 
because we strive to construct a conscions world that is 
safe and manageable m that natural law holds 10 it the 
place of statute law in a commonwealth. Yet, even in our 
nndst, the poet now and then catches sight of the figures 
that people the mght-world-the spirits, demoos and gods. 
He knows that a purposiveness out-reaching human ends is 
the life-giving secret for man ; he has a presentunent of 
incomprehensible happenings in the pleroma In short, he 
sees something of that psycluc world that stnkes terror into 
the savage and the barbsrlan. 
From the very first beginnings of human society onward 
man's efforts to give his vague intimations a binding form 
have left their traces. Even m the Rhodesian chf!-drawings 
of the Old Stone Age there appears, side by Side with the 
most amazingly hie-like representations of animals, an 
abstract pattern-a double cross contained in a circle. This 
des,gn has tumed up in every cultural region, more or less, 
and we find it today not only in Christian churches, but in 
Tibetan monasteries as well. It is the so-called sun-wheel, 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 189 
and as it dates from a time when no one had thought of 
wheels as a mechamcal device, it cannot have had its source 
in any experience of the external world. It is rather a symbol 
that stands for a psychic happening ; it covers an experience 
of the inner world, and is no doubt as hfehke a representation 
as the famous rhinoceros with the tick-birds on its back. 
There has never been a primitive culture that did not possess 
a system of secret tea.chmg, and in many cultures this system 
IS highly developed. The men's councils and the totem-clans 
preserve thIS teaching about hidden things that lie apart from 
man's daytune existence-things which, from primeval 
t1Ines, have always constituted lns most vital experiences 
Knowledge about them is handed on to younger men in the 
ntes of lllltlation. The mystenes of the Gra:co-Roman 
world performed the same office, and the rich mythology of 
anhqmty is a relic of such experiences in the earhest stages 
of human development. 
It is therefore to be expected of the poet that he will 
resort to mythology in order to give his experience its most 
fittmg expression. It would be a senous mistake to suppose 
that he works with materials received at second-hand The 
pnmonhal expenence is the source of his creativeness ; 1t 
cannot be fathomed, and therefore requires mythological 
imagery to give it form In itself it offers no words or 
images, for it is a vision seen "as in a glass, darkly". It 
is merely a deep presentunent that strives to find expression. 
It is hke a whirlwmd that seizes everything within reach 
and, by carrying it aloft, assumes a visible shape. Since 
the particular expression can never exhaust the possibilities 
of the vision, but falls far short of 1t in richness of content, 
the poet must have at his disposal a huge store of materials 
if he is to communicate even a few of his mtuna.tions. What 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com190 PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
is more, he must resort to an imagery that is difficult to 
handle and full of contradictions in order to express the 
weiid paradoxicality of ms vision. Dante's presentunents 
are clothed in images that run the gamut of Heaven and 
Hell ; Goethe must bring in the Blocksberg and the infernal 
regions of Greek antiquity; Wagner needs the whole body 
of Nordic myth; Nietzsche returns to the hieratic style and 
recreates the legendary seer of prehistoric tunes , Blake 
invents for himself mdescribable figures, and Spitteler 
borrows old names for new creatures of the imagmation. 
And no intermediate step is missing in the whole range from 
the ineffably sublime to the perwrsely grotesque. 
Psychology can do nothing towards the elucidation of this 
colourful unagery except bring together materials for com­
parison and offer a terminology for its discussion. According 
to this terminology. that which appears in the vision is the 
collective unconscious. We mean by collective nnconscious, 
a certain psychic disposition shaped by the forces of heredity ; 
from it consciousness has developed. In the physical 
structure of the body we find traces of earlier stages of 
evolution, and we may expect the human psyche also to 
conform in its make-up to the law of phylogeny. It lS a 
fact that in eclipses of consciousness-in dreams, narcotic 
states and cases of msanity-there come to the surface 
psychic products or contents that show all the traits of 
primitive levels of psychic development. The unages 
themselves are sometimes of such a prim1bve character that 
we might suppose them derived from ancient, esoteric 
teachiog. Mythological themes clothed in modern dress also 
frequently appear. What is of particular importance for 
the study of literature in these maoifestations of the 
collective unconscions is that they are compensatory to the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 191 
conscious attitude. Tius is to say that they can bring a 
one-sided, abnormal, or dangerous state of coDSC1ousness 
into equihbnum in an apparently purposive way. In dreams 
we can see tins process very clearly in its positive aspect. 
In cases of msanity the compensatory process is often 
perfectly obvious, but takes a negative fonn There are 
persons, for instance, who have anxiously shut themselves 
off from all the world only to discover one day that their 
most 1ntunate secrets are known and talked about by 
everyone.I 
If we consider Goethe's Faust, and leave aside the 
possibihty that 1t is compensatory to 1us own conscious 
attitude, the questJ.on that we must answer is this : In 
what relation does tt stand to the conscious outlook of 1us 
tune ; Great poetry draws its strength from the life of 
mankmd, and we completely miss its meaning if we try to 
denve 1t from personal. factors Whenever the collective 
unconscious becomes a living expenence and is brought to 
bear upon the conscious outlook of an age, this event is a 
creative act which is of importance to everyone living m that 
age. A work of art is produced that contains what may 
truthfully be called a message to generations of men. So 
Faust touches something in the soul of every German So 
also Dante's fame is IDllDortal, while Th, Shepherd of Hemras 
JUSt failed of inclusion m the New Testament canon. Every 
period has its bias, its particular prejudice and its psychic 
ailment. An epoch is like an individual ; it has its own 
limitations of conscious outlook, and therefore requu-es a 
compensatory adjustment. This is effected by the collective 
unconscious m that a poet, a seer or a leader allows himseli 
1 See my article "Mmd and the Earth". m Conmlni:t,ot1s to .d1111lytm1l 
P1vd1ology Kllpn Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co, London, 1g.z8 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comxga PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
to be guided by the unexpressed desire of his times and shows 
the way, by word or deed, to the attainment of that winch 
everyone blindly craves and expects-whether this attain­
ment results m good or evil, the healing of an epoc:h or 1ts 
destruct:J.on. 
It is always dangerous to speak of one's own times, because 
what is at stake in the present is too vast for comprehension. 
A few hints must therefore suffice. Francesco Colorma's 
book is cast in the form of a dream, and is the apotheosis of 
natural love taken as a human relation , without countenanc­
ing a wtld mdulgence of the senses, he leaves completely 
aside the Cbnstian sacrament of marriage. The book was 
wntten in 1453. R1<ier Haggard, whose life coincides WJ.th 
the flowenng-time of the Victorian era, takes up this subJect 
and deals with it m lus own way ; he does not cast 1t m the 
form of a dream, but allows us to feel the tension of moral 
confhct. Goethe weaves the theme of Gretchen-Helen­
Mater-Gloriosa hl<e a red thread into the colourful tapest,y 
of Faust. Nietzsche proclaims the death of God, and 
Spitteler transforms the waxmg and waning of the gods mto 
a myth of the seasons. Whatever his importance, each of 
these poets speaks with the V01CO of thousands and ten 
thousands, foretelling ~ in the conscious outlook of 
Ins time. 
II 
THE POET 
Creativeness, hke the freedom of the wtll, contains a secret. 
The psychologist can describe both these manifestations as 
processes, but he can find no solution of the philosophical 
problems they offer. Creative man is a nddle that we 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE r93 
may try to answer in various ways, but always in vain, 
a truth that has not prevented modem psychology from 
turning now and again to the question of the artist and his 
art Freud thought that he had found a key in his procedure 
of deriving the work of art from the personal expenences of 
the artist. 1 It is true that certain poss1bthties lay in this 
direction, for 1t was conceivable that a work of art, no less 
than a neurosis, might be traced back to those knots in 
psycluc life that we call the complexes It was FieUd's 
great discovery that neuroses have a causal ongin m the 
psychic realm-that they take thell' nse from emotwnal 
states and from real or l.Dlagllled childhood expenences. 
Certain of his followers, hke Rank aod Stekel, have taken 
up related hnes of enquuy and have achieved important 
resolts It is undemable that the poet's psycluc disposition 
permeates Ins work root and branch Nor is there anythmg 
new Ill the statement that personal factors laigely inllueoce 
the poet's ch01ce and use of his matenals. Credit, however, 
must certamly be given to the Freudian school for showing 
how far-reaching tlus mfluence is and 1n what cunous ways 
it comes to expression 
Freud takes the neurosis as a substitute for a direct 
means of gratJ.ficatJ.on He therefore regards 1t as something 
mappropnate-a mistake, a dodge, an excuse, a voluntary 
blmdness. To him it IS essen:tially a shortconnng that should 
never have been Smee a neul'OSlS, to all appearances, 
is nothing but a disturbance that 1S all the more llTltatmg 
because it is without sense or meaning, few people will 
venture to say a good word for it. And a work of art is 
brought into questionable proximity with the neurosis 
when it 1S taken as something wluch can be analysed in 
1 See Freud's ea-.y OD Jemen.'1 G,..~ 1111d OD Leonardo da Vlnm. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comr94 PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
terms of the poet's represswns. In a sense it finds itself in 
good company, for rehgion and philosophy are regarded in 
the same light by Freudian psychology. No objectioo can 
be raised if it is admitted that this approach amounts to 
nothing more than the elucidation of those persooal deter­
minants without which a work of art is unthinkable. But 
should the claim be made that such an analysis accounts for 
the work of art itself, then a categorical denial is called for. 
The personal idiosyncrasies that creep into a work of art 
are not essential ; in fact, the more we have to cope with 
these peculia.rities, the less is 1t a question of art. What is 
essenbal in a work of art is that 1t should rise far above the 
realm of persooal life and speak from the spirit and heart of 
the poet as man to the spirit and heart of mankind The 
personal aspect 1s a furutation-a.nd even a SID-in the realm 
of art Wheo a form of " art " IS primarily persooal it 
deserves to be treated as i:f it were a neurosis There may be 
some vahdity in the idea held by the Freudian school that 
artists without excepb.on are narcissistic-by which is 
meant that they are undewloped persoos with infantile and 
auto-erotic traits The statement is only valid, however, 
for the artist as a person, and has nothing to do with the 
man as an artist. In bis capacity of artist he is neither 
auto-erotic, nor hetero-erotic, nor erotic in any sense. He 
is objective and impersonal-even inhuman-for as an 
artist he is his work, and not a human being. 
Every creative person is a duality or a synthesis of con­
tradictory aptitudes. On the one side he is a human being 
with a personal life, while on the other side he is an im­
persooal, creative process. Since as a human being he may 
be 10t1Dd or morbid, we must look at Ins psychic make-up 
to line! the determinants of his persooality. But we can 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE I95 
only understand him in his capacity of artist by lookmg at 
his creative achievement. We should make a sad mistake tf 
we tried to explain the mode of life of an Enghsh gentleman. 
a Prussian officer, or a cardinal in terms of personal factors. 
The gentleman, the officer and the clenc function as such in 
an impersonal Wle, and their psychic make-up is qualified 
by a pecuhar obJectivity. We must grant that the artist 
does not function in an official capacity-the very opposite 
is nearer the truth. He nevertheless resembles the types I 
have named in one respect, for the specrlically arltstic chs­
posttion mvolves an overweight of collective psycluc hfe as 
agamst the personal Art IS a kmd of innate dnve that 
seizes a human being and makes hun its instrument. The 
artist is not a person endowed with free will who seeks his 
own ends, but one who allows art to realize its purposes 
through him. As a human being he may have moods and 
a will and personal aims, but as an artist he is "man" in a 
higher sense---he is" collective man "-one who cames and 
shapes the unconscmus, psychic hfe of mankmd. To 
perform tlus difficult office 1t is sometimes necessary for hlm 
to sacrifice happiness and everythmg that makes life worth 
hving for the ordmary human being. 
All this being so, it ts not strange that the arttst is an 
especially mterestmg case for the psychologist who uses an 
analyb.cal method. The artist's hfe cannot be otherwise 
than full of conflicts, for two forces are at war with.J.n lum­
en the one hand the common human longmg for happiness, 
satisfaction and secunty m hfe, and on the other a ruthless 
passion for creation which may go so far as to override 
every personal desire The lives of artists are as a rule so 
highly unsatisfactory-not to say tragic-because of their 
inferiority on the human and personal side, and not because 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comzg6 PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
of a sinister dispensation. There are hardly any exceptions 
to the rule that a person must pay dearly for the divine 
gilt of the creative fire It is as though each of us were 
endowed at birth with a certain capital of energy. The 
strongest force in our make-up will seize and all but 
monopolu.e this energy, leaving so little over that nothing 
of value can come of 1t. In this way the creative force can 
drain the human impulses to such a degree that the personal 
ego must develop all sorts of bad qualities----ruthlessoess, 
selfishness and vanity (so-called " auto-erotism ")-<md eveo 
every kind of vice, in order to maintain the spark of life and 
to keep itself from being wholly bereft The auto-erotism 
of artists resembles that of illegitimate or neglected cluldren 
who from their tenderest years must protect themselves from 
the destructive iniluence of people who have no love to give 
them-who develop bad qualities for that very purpose and 
later maintain an invincible egocentnsm by remaimng all 
their hves infantile and helpless or by actively offending 
agamst the moral code or the law How can we doubt that 
it is his art that explains the artist, and not the insufficiencies 
and conflicts of ms personal hie ? These are nothing hut 
the regrettable results of the fact that he is an artist-that is 
to say, a man who from Ins very birth has been called to a 
greater task than the ordinary mortal A spec,al ability 
means a heavy expenditure of energy ma particular direction, 
with a con.sequent drain from some other side of life. 
It makes no difference whether the poet knows that ms 
work is begotten, grows and matures with him, or whether 
he supposes that by taking thought he produces it out of the 
void His opimon of the matter does not chaoge the fact 
that his own work outgrows him as a child its mother. The 
creative process has feminine quality, and the creative work 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE I'Y/ 
arises from unconscious depths-we might say, from the 
realm of the mothers. Whenever the creative force pre­
dommates, human hfe is ruled and moulded by the un­
conscJ.ous as against the active will, and the conscious ego is 
swept along on a subterranean current, being nothing more 
than a helpless observer of events. The work in process 
becomes the poet's fate and determmes his psycluc develop­
ment. It is not Goethe who creates Faun, but Fatm wbich 
creates Goethe And what is Faust but a symbol? By this 
I do not mean an allegory that pomts to something all too 
familiar, but an expression that stands for something not 
clearly known and yet profoundly ahve Here it is sometlnng 
that hves in the soul of every German, aod that Goethe has 
helped to bring to birth. Could we conceive of anyone but 
a German wntmg Faust or Also sprach Zarathustra;, Both 
play upon something that reverberates in the German soul 
-a "primordial unage ", as Jacob Burckhardt once called 
it-the figure of a physician or teacher of mankind. The 
archetypal image of the WISe man, the saviour or redeemer, 
lies buried and dormant in man's unconscious smce the 
dawn of culture ; it IS awakened whenever the times are out 
of Joint and a human society is COIJllDltted to a serious 
error When people go astray they feel the need of a gwde 
or teacher or even of the physician. These pnmorchal 
images are numerous, but do not appear in the dreams of 
mchviduals or in works of art until they are called into 
being by the waywardness of the general outlook. When 
conse1ous hfe is charactenzed by one•sidedness and by a 
false attitude, then they are activated-one might say • 
.. instinctively "-and come to light m the dreams of in­
dividuals and the visions of artists and seers, thus restoring 
the psycl,ic equilibrium of the epoch. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com19'1 PSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 
In this way the work of the poet comes to meet the 
spiritual need of the society in wluch he lives, and for this 
reason his work means more to him than his personal fate, 
whether he is aware of this or not. Being essentially the 
instrument for his work, he is subordinate to 1t, and we have 
no reason for expecting him to interpret it for us. He has 
done the best that m hun lies in giving it form, and he must 
leave the interpretation to others and to the future A 
great work of art is like a dream, for all 1ts apparent obvious­
ness it does not exp1am itself and is never unequivocal. A 
dream never says : " You ought ", or : " Thu is the truth ". 
It presents an unage m much the same way as nature allows 
a plant to grow, and we must draw our own conclUS1ons If 
a person has a mghtmare, 1t means either that he 1S too 
much given to fear, or else that he is too exempt from it; 
and if he dreams of the old wise man it may mean that he is 
too pedagogical, as also that he stands m need of a teacher. 
In a subtle way both meamngs come to the same tlung, as 
we perceive when we are able to let the work of art act upon 
us as it acted upon the artist. To grasp its meaning, we must 
allow it to shape us as it once shaped bun Then we under­
stand the nature of his expenence. We see that he has 
drawn upon the healing and redeemmg forces of the collective 
psyche that underlies consciousness with its isolation and 
its painful errors ; that he has penetrated to that matnx 
of life in which all men are embedded, winch imparts a 
common rhythm to all human existence, and allows the 
individual to commumcate his feeling and his striving to 
mankind as a whole. 
The secret of artistic creation and of the effectiveness of 
art is to be found in a return to the state of j,4,heipatwn 
mysttq111-to that level of experience at which 1t is man who 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOLOGY AND LITERATURE 199 
lives, and not the individual, and at winch the weal or woe 
of the single human bemg does not count, but only human 
existence. This is why every great work of art 1S ob1ective 
and impersonal, but none the loss profoundly moves us each 
and all And tlus is also why the personal life of the poet 
cannot be held essential to his art-but at most a help or a 
hindrance to his crea:b.ve task, He may go the way of a 
Philistine, a good citizen, a neurotic, a fool or a cnminal. 
His personal career may be mevitable and interesting, but 
1t does not explam the poet. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comIX 
THE BASIC POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL 
PSYCHOLOGY 
IT was universally beheved m the Middle Ages as well as in 
the Grn:co-Roman world that the soul is a substance. 1 
Indeed, mankmd as a whole has held t1us behef from its 
earhest beginmngs, and 1t was left for the second half of the 
nmeteenth century to develop a " psychology without the 
soul " 11 Under the influence of scientific materialism, 
everytlung that could not be seen with the eyes or touched 
with the hands was held in doubt , such thmgs were even 
laughed at because of their supposed affinity with meta­
phymcs Nothing was considered "scientific" or adn11tted 
to be true unless it could be perceived by the senses or traced 
back to physical causes This radical change of view did 
not begin with plulosophical matenalism, for the way was 
being prepared long before When the spnitual catastrophe 
of the Reformation put an end to the Gothic Age with its 
impetuous yearning for the heights, its geographical con­
finement, and its restncted view of the world, the vertical 
outlook of the European mind was forthwith intersected by 
the horizontal outlook of modern times. Consciousness 
ceased to grow upward, and grew instead in breadth of 
1 Subrtanc:e • t , that wtu.ch has mdependent ex!st.ence (Trn.r) 
1 "Psyeliolo,u oh, Sul, "--compare the works of F A Lange (182S-
187s) It 11 to be noted that tho German word s,.,. means psyche as well 
aa eouJ. (Tra..s) 
000 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 20x 
view, as well as in knowledge of the terrestrial globe. Tius 
was the period of the great voyages, and of the wu1ening of 
man's ideas of the world by empuical discoveries. Behef 
in the substantiality of the spirit yielded more and more to 
the obtrusive conviction that material things alone have 
substance, till at last, after nearly four hundred years, the 
leading European thinkers and mvestigators came to regard 
the mmd as wholly dependent on matter and matenal 
causation. 
We are certamly not Justified in saying that philosophy or 
natural science has brought about this complete volte-face. 
Th.ere were always a fan- number of mtelhgent plnlosophers 
and scientists who had enough insight and depth of thought 
to accept this 1J'1'8.t1onal reversal of standpomt only under 
protest ; a few even resisted it, but they had no following 
and were powerless against the popular attitude of un­
reasoned, not to say emotional, surrender to the all-101port­
ance of the physical world Let no one suppose that so 
radical a change m man's outlook could be brought about 
by reasoning and reflectJ.on, for no chain of reasomng can 
prove or disprove the eXIStence of either mind or matter. 
Both these concepts, as every intelligent man today may 
ascertain for hrmself, are mere symbols that stand for 
something unknown and unexplored, and this somethmg is 
postulated or denied according to man's mood and dis­
position or as the spint of the age dictates. There is nothing 
to prevent the speculabve intellect from treating the psyche, 
on the one hand, as a complicated biochemical phenomenon, 
and at bottom a mere play of electrons, or, on the other, 
from regazding the unpredictable hehavwur of electrons as 
the sign of mental hfe even in them 
The fact that a metaphysics of the mind was supplanted 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com20z POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
in the nineteenth century by a metaphysics of matter, is a 
mere trick if we consider it as a question for the intellect ; 
yet regarded from the standpoint of psychology, it IS an 
unexampled revolution in man's outlook upon the world. 
Other-worldliness is converted mto matter-of-facbJ.ess ; 
empirical boundaries are set to man's discusston of every 
problem, to his choice of purposes, and even to what he 
calls " meaning ". Intangible, mner happenings seem to 
have to yield place to things in the external, tangible world, 
and no value exists if it is not founded on a so-called fact. 
At least, this is how 1t appears to the simple nund 
It IS futile, indeed, to attempt to treat this unreasoned 
change of opinion as a question of philosophy We had 
better not try to do so, for d we maintain that mental 
phenomena arise from the activity of glands, we are sure of 
the thanks and respect of our contemporaries, whereas if we 
explain the break-up of the atom in the sun as an emanation 
of the creative W eJl/:eist, we shall he looked down upon as 
intellectual freaks. And yet both views are equally logical, 
equally metaphysical, equally arbitrary and equally symbolic 
From the standpoint of epistemology it is just as admissible 
to derive ammals from the human species, as man from 
animal species. But we know how ill Professor Daque 
fared in his academic career because of his sin against the 
spirit of the age, which will not Jet itself he trilled with It 
is a religion, or-even more-a creed which has absolutely 
no connection with reason, but whose sigmficance hes in the 
unpleasant fact that it is taken as the absolute measure of 
all truth and is supposed always to have common-sense upon 
its side. 
The spirit of the age cannot he compassed by the processes 
of human reason. It 1s an mclinat1on, an emotional tendency 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 203 
that works upon weaker minds, through the unconscious, with 
an overwhelming force of suggestion that carries them along 
with 1t To tlunk otherwise than our contemporaries think 
is somehow illegitimate and disturbing ; it is even indecent, 
morbid or blasphemous, and therefore socially dangerous for 
the mdividual He is stupidly swimnung against the social 
current. Just as formerly the assumption was unquestionable 
that everythmg that eXISts takes its rise from the creativP 
will of a God who is spirit, so the nineteenth century dis· 
covered the equally unquestwnable troth that everything 
arises from matenal causes. Today the psyche does not 
build itself a body, but on the contrary, matter, by chemical 
action, produces the psyche This reversal of outlook would 
be ludicrous 1f it were not one of the outstanding features of 
the spirit of the age. It JS the popular way of thinking, and 
therefore it is decent, reasonable, scientific and normal. 
Mmd must be thought to be an epiphenomenon of matter. 
The same conclUSlC>Il is reached even rl we say not " mind " 
but " psyche ", and in place of matter speak of bram, 
hormones, instmcts or dnves To grant the substantiality 
of the soul or psyche is repugnant to the spirit of the age, 
for to do so would be heresy. 
We have now discovered that 1t was mtellectually un­
JUStified presumption on our forefathers' pa.rt to assume 
that man has a soul ; that that soul has substance, is of 
divine nature and therefore immortal , that there is a 
power inherent in it which builds up the body, supports its 
life, hesls its ills and enables the soul to hve independently 
of the body ; that there are incorporeal spirits with which the 
soul asSOC1&tes ; and that beyond our empuical present there 
is a spiritual world from winch the soul receives knowledge 
of spiritual things whose origins cannot be discovered in 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com204 POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
this visible world But people who are not above the 
general level of consciousness have not yet discovered that 
it is just as presumptuous and fantastic for us to assume 
that matter produces spirit , that apes give rise to human 
beiIJ8S ; that lrmn the hannonious interplay of the drives 
of hunger, love, and power Kant's Cnt,q,,e of Pure 
R""°"' should have arisen ; that the bram-cells manufacture 
thoughts, and that all this could not possibly be other than 
itis. 
What or who, indeed, is this all-powerful matter ? It is 
once more man's picture of a crea:b.ve god, stripped t1us 
time of his anthropomorphic traits and taking the form of a 
universal concept whose meaning everyone presumes to 
understand. Consciousness today has grown enormously 
in breadth and extent, but unfortunately only in spatial 
dimenswns ; its temporal reach has not mcreased, for were 
that the case we should have a much more living sense of 
history. If onr consciousness were not of today only, but 
had historical continuity, we should be remmded of similar 
transformations of the divine princ,ple in Greek philosophy, 
and this might dispose us to be more critical. of our present 
phtlosophical assumptions. We are, however, effectively 
prevented from indulging in such reflections by the spnit 
of the age. It looks upon history as a mere arsenal of 
convenient arguments that enables us, on occasion, to say : 
"Why, even old Anstotle knew that." This being the 
state of affairs, we must ask ourselves how the spirit of the 
age attains such an uncanny power. It is without doubt a 
psychic phenomenon of the greatest importance-at all 
events a prejudice so deeply rooted that uotil we give it 
proper consideration we cannot even approach the problem 
of the psyche. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 205 
As I have said, the irresisbble tendency to account for 
everything on physical grounds corresponds to the honzontal 
development of consciousness in the last four centunes, and 
this horizontal perspective is a reaction against the ex­
clUS1vely vertical perspective of the Gotluc Age It is a 
mamfestation of the crowd-mind, and as such is not to be 
treated m temis of the consciousness of mdivtduals. Re­
sembhng m tlus the prinutives, we are at first wholly 
unconscious of our actions, and only discover long afterwards 
why 1t was that we acted ma certain way. In the meantime, 
we content ourselves with all sorts of ratlonahzed accounts 
of our behaviour, all of them equally mad.equate 
If we were coI1SC1ous of the spmt of the age, we should 
know why we are so mchned to account for everything on 
physical grounds , we should know that 1t is because, up 
till now, too much was accounted form terms of the spuit. 
Tins reahzatum would at once make us cnhcal of our bl8.S 
We should say· most hkely we are now making as senous 
an error on the other side We delude ourselves with the 
thought that we know much more about matter than about 
a " metaphysical " mmd, and so we overestunate physical 
causation and believe that it alone affords us a true explana­
tion of hfe. But matter IS Just as mscrutable as mmd. As 
to the ultlmate we can know nothmg, and only when we 
admit this do we return to a state of eqwhbnwn. Tius 1s 
m no way to deny the close connection of psychic happenings 
with the physiological structure of the bran, with the glands, 
and the body in general We are once for all deeply con­
vinced of the fact that the contents of COilSClousness are to 
a large part determined by our sense-perceptions. We 
cannot fail to recognize that unalterable characteristics of a 
physical as well as a psychic nature are unconsciously in-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com2o6 POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
grained in us by heredity, and we are deeply struck by the 
power of the instincts w1n.ch. inhlbit or reinforce or otherwise 
modify our mental capacities. Indeed, we must admit that 
as to cause, purpose and meaning, the human psyche-­
however we approach it-is first and foremost a close reflec­
tion of everything we call corporeal, empirical and mundane. 
And finally, in the face of all these adnusstoos, we must ask 
ourselves if the psyche is not after all a secondary mamfesta­
tion-a.n epiphenomenon-and completely dependent upon 
the body. In the light of reason and of our comnutments as 
practical men to an actual world, we say yes It is only our 
doubts as to the omnipotence of matter which could lead us 
to examine in a critical way tins verdict of science upon the 
human psyche. 
The obJection has already been raised that thts approach 
reduces psycbic happenings to a kmd of activity of the 
glands; thoughts are regarded. a,; secretions of the brain, 
and so we ac1ueve a psychology without the psyche. From 
this standpoint, it must be confessed, the psyche does not 
exist m its own right , 1t is nothing m itself, but is the mere 
expression of physical processes. That these processes bave 
the qualities of consciousness is Just an irreducible fact­
were 1t otherwise, so the argument runs, we could not speak 
of the psyche at all ; there would be no consciousness, aod 
so we should have nothing to say about anything. Conscious­
ness, therefore, is taken as the s1,u qua non of psycluc hfe 
-that is to say, as the psyche itself. And so it comes about 
that all modern " psychologies without the psyche " are 
studies of consciousness which ignore the existence of 
nnconscious psychic life. 
Yet there is not °"" modern psychology-there are several. 
This is curious enough when we remember that there is only 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 207 
one science of mathematics, of geology, zoology, botany and 
so forth. But there are so many psychologies that an 
American Uruversity was able to publish a tluck volume 
under the title : Psychologus of 1930 I beheve there are 
as many psychologtes as philosoplues, for there is also no 
one Slllgle plulosophy, but many. I m.entwn tins for the 
reason that philosophy and psychology are hnked by in­
dissoluble bonds wluch are kept 111 bemg by the mter-relation 
of their subJect-matters. Psychology takes the psyche for 
its subject-matter, and philosophy-to put it bnefly-takes 
the world. Until recently psychology was a special branch 
of philosophy, but now we are commg to something which 
Nietzsche foresaw-the ascendance of psychology 1n its own 
right It is even threatening to swallow philosophy. The 
inner resemblance of the two discJ.phnes consists m tlus, 
that both are systems of opmion about subject-matter which 
cannot be fully experienced and therefore cannot be compre­
hended by a purely empincal approach. Both fields of study 
thus encourage speculation, with the result that opinions are 
formed in such variety and profusion that heavy volumes 
are needed to contain them all, whether they belong to the 
one field or to the other. Neither disc1plme can do without 
the other, and the one always furrushes the implicit-and 
frequently even unconscious-primary assumptions of the 
other. 
The modern preference for physical grounds of explanation 
leads, as already remarked, to a " psychology without the 
psyche "-I mean, to the view that the psyche is nothing 
but a product of biochenucal processes As for a modern, 
scientifi:c psychology wlnch starts from the mind as such, 
there simply is none. No one today would venture to 
found a scientific psychology upon the poatulate of an 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com208 POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
independent psyche that is not determined by the body. 
Toe idea of spirit m and for itself, of a self-contained world.­
system of the spirit that is the only adequate postulate for 
the belief in autonomous, individual souls, is extremely 
unpopular with us, to say the least. But I must remark that, 
in 1914, I attended at Bedford College, London, a joint 
session of the Aristotelian Society, the Mind AssOCJabon 
and the British Psychological Society, at which a symposium 
was held on the question : Are individual nnnds contained 
in God or are they not -;, Should anyone in England dispute 
the scientific standing of these SOC1eties, he would not receive 
a very conha1 hearing, for their memberslnp mcludes the 
outstandmg mmds of the country. And perhaps I was the 
only person in the audience who listened with surprise to 
arguments that had the nng of the thirteenth century Tlus 
instance may serve to show that the idea of an autonomous 
spmt whose exIStence is taken for granted has not died 
out everywhere m Europe or become a mere fossil left over 
from the Middle Ages 
If we keep this in mind, we can perhaps summon up the 
courage to col1Slder the possibility of a " psychology with 
the psyche "-that is, of a field of study based on the assump­
tion of an autonomous psyche. We need not be alarmed at 
the unpopulanty of such an undertaking, for to postulate 
mind is no more fantastic than to postulate matter Smee 
we have literally no idea of the way in which what is psycluc 
can anse from physical elemeots, and yet cannot deny the 
reality of psychic events, we are free to frame our uswnpbons 
the other way about for once. and to hold that the psyche 
arises from a spiritual pnnciple which is as ma.eeesstble to 
our wuierstandmg as matter. To be sure, t1us will not be a 
nwdem psychology, for to be modern is to deny such a. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 209 
possibility. For better or worse, therefore. we must turn 
back to the teachings of our forefathers, for they it was who 
made such assumptiOIIS. The ancient view held that spirit 
was essentially the life of the body, the hie-breath, or a 
kind of life-force which assumed spatial and corporeal form 
at birth or after conception, and left the dyiDg body again 
after the final breath. The spirit in itself was considered as 
a being without extension, and because it existed before 
talang corporeal form and afterwards as well, 1t was con­
sidered as tuneless and hence unm.ortal. From the stand­
point of modem, scientific psychology, this conception 1S of 
course pure illusion. But as it is not our intention to mdulge 
in "metaphysics", even of a modem vanety, we will 
e:xamme tins time-honoured notion for once m an un­
pre1udiced way and test its empmca.l Justification 
The names people give to their expenences are often 
qwte enhghterung What is the origin of the word Seels ? 
Like the English word soul, it comes from the Gothic sa,rffla 
and the Old German sa,wal8, and these can be connected with 
the Greek awlos, mobile, coloured, iridescent The Greek 
word psyche also means butterfly. Sas'IIHlltJ is related on the 
other side to the old Slavomc word slla, meaning strength 
From these connections hght 15 thrown on the origmal 
mearu.ng of the word Sule . 1t lS moving force, that IS, 
life-force. 
The Lahn words a,mnus, spirit, and ansma, soul, are the 
same as the Greek 11nemos, wind. The other Greek word for 
wind, pneumr,, means also spirit. In Gothic we find the 
same word m us--a,um, to breathe out, and in Latin ••lulare, 
to pant. In Old High German, sf>•nlus - was rendered 
by atun, breath. In Arabic, wind is Jih, and riih is soul, 
spirit. There is a quite similar connection with the Greek 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com2m POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
psyche, which is related to psycho, to breathe, psychos, cool, 
psychros, cold, and phusa, bellows. These affinities show 
clearly how in Latin, Greek and Arabic the names given to 
the soul are related to the notion of moving air, the "cold 
breath of the spirit ". And this also is why the primitive 
point of view endows the soul with an invisible breath-body 
It is quite evident that, since breath is the sign of hfe, 
breath is taken for life, as are also movement and moving 
force. According to another prirmtive view the soul is 
regarded as fire or flame, because warmth also is a sign of 
life. A very cunous, but by no means rare, primitive con­
ception identifies the soul with the name. The name of an 
individual is his soul, and hence anses the custom of usmg 
the ancestor's name to reincarnate the ancestral soul in the 
new-born child We can infer from this that the ego­
consc1ousness was recogruzed as an expresston of the soul. 
Not infrequently the soul is identified with the shadow, for 
wluch reason it is a deadly insult to tread upon a person's 
shadow. For the same reason, noon-day, the ghost-hour of 
southern latitudes, ts collSldered threaterung; the shadow 
then grows small, and this means that life is endangered. 
This conception of the shadow contains an idea which was 
indicated by the Greeks m the word synopados, "he who 
follows behind ". They expressed in this way the feeling 
of an intangible, living presence-the same feeling winch 
led to the behef that the souls of the departed were shadows. 
These indications may serve to show how primitive man 
expenenced the psyche. To him the psyche appears as the 
source of hfe, the pnme mover, a ghost-like presence which 
has objective reality. Therefore the primitive knows how 
to converse with his soul ; 1t becomes vocal within him 
because it is not he himself and his consciousness. To 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 2n 
primitive man the psyche is not, as it is to us, the epitome 
of all that is subjective and subject to the will ; on the 
contrary, it is something objecbve, contained in itself, and 
living its own life. 
This way of looking at the matter is empirically justified, 
for not only on the prumtive level, but WJ.th civilized man 
as well, psychic happenings have an objective side. In large 
measure they are withdrawn from our conscious control. We 
are unable, for example, to suppress many of our emotions ; 
we cannot change a bad mood into a good one, and we cannot 
command our dreams to come or go The most intelligent 
man may at tunes be obsessed with thoughts whtch he 
cannot drive away with the greatest effort of wtll The 
mad tncks that memory plays sometimes leave us m helpless 
amazement, and at any time unexpected fantBS1es may ran 
through our minds We only beheve that we are masters in 
our own house because we hke to flatter ourselves. Actually, 
however, we are dependent to a startling degree upon the 
proper funchontng of the unconscious psyche, and must 
trust that it does not fail us. If we study the psychic 
processes of neurotic persons, it seems perfectly ludicrous 
that any psychologist could take the psyche as the eqmvalent 
of consc1oumess. And it is well known that the psychic 
processes of neurotics differ hardly at all from those of so­
called normal persons-for what man today is qmte sure 
that he is not neurone ' 
This being so, we shall do well to admit that there is 
justification for the old view of the soul as a.n objective 
reahty-as something independent, and therefore capricious 
and dangerous The further assumption that tins being, so 
mysterious and terrifying, is at the same time the source 
of life, is also understandable in the light of psychology. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com212 POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
Experience shows us that the sense of the "I "-the ego­
consciousness-g out of unconscious hfe. The small 
child has psychic hie without any demonstrable ego­
cODSC1011SI1ess, for which reason the earliest years leave 
hardly any traces in memory. Where do all our good and 
helpful flashes of intelligence come from ? What is the 
source of our enthusiasms, inspirations, and of our heightened 
feeling for hie ? The pnmitive senses in the depths of his 
soul the spnngs of life , he is deeply impressed with the 
life-dispensing activity of his soul, and he therefore beheves 
in everything that affects it-m magical practices of eve,y 
kind. That IS why, for lum, the soul IS hfe itself He does 
not imagine that he directs it, but feels himself dependent 
upon it m every respect 
However preposterous the idea of the unmortality of the 
soul may seem to us, it is nothing extraordmary to the 
pnmitive. After all, the soul is something out of the common 
Whtle everythmg else that exists takes up a certam amount 
of room, the soul cannot be located in space. We suppose, 
of course, that our thoughts are in our heads, but when 1t 
comes to our feelings we begin to be uncertain , they appear 
to dwell 1n the region of the heart. Our sensahons are 
dJstnbuted over the whole body. Our theory is that the 
seat of consciousness IS m the head, but the Pueblo Indums 
told me that Americans were mad because they beheved 
their thoughts were in their heads, whereas any sensible 
man knows that he thinks with his heart. Certain negro 
tribes locate their psychic functioning neither in the head 
nor in the heart, but in the belly. 
To this uncertainty about the localization of psychic 
funct.ions another difficulty is added. Psychic contents in 
sezreral are nan-spatial except in the particular reslm of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 2I3 
sensation. What bulk can we ascnbe to thoughts ;, Are 
they small, large, long, tlun, heavy, fluid, straight, circular, 
or what ? If we wished to fonn a vivid picture of a non­
spatial bemg of the louith dimension, we should do well to 
take thought, as a being, for our model 
It would all be so much simpler if we could only deny the 
lt existence of the psyche. But here we are with our immediate 
experiences of something th2t tS-<10methmg that has taken 
root in the midst of our measurable, ponderable, three­
dimensional reahty, th2t differs bafflingly from tins in every 
respect aod in all its parts, aod yet reflects it. The psyche 
may be regarded as a mathematical point and at the same 
time as a umverse of fixed stars. It is small wonder, then, 
if, to the unsoplnsticated mind, such a paradoxical being 
borders on the chvme. If 1t occupies no space, it has no 
body. Bodies die, but can something invisible and in­
corporeal disappear ;, What IS more, hfe and psyche existed 
for me before I could say " I ", and when this " I " dlS­
appears, as in sleep or unconsciousness, hfe and psyche still 
go on, as our observation of other people and our own 
dreams inform us. Why should the sunple mind deny, m the 
face of such expenences, that the " soul " lives m a realm 
beyond the body ' I must admit that I can - as httle 
nonsense m this so-called superstitwn as in the findings 
of research regardmg heredity OI the basic mstmcts. 
We can easily understand why hlgher and even divine 
knowledge was formerly ascribed to the psyche if we remem­
ber that in ancient cultures, beginning with prinutive times, 
man always resorted to dreams and VIS10ns as a source of 
information. It is a fa.et that the unconscious contains 
subliminal percephons whose scope is nothing less than 
as!OWlding. In recogmtion of this fact, primitive societies 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com214 POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
used dreams and VlSlODS as important sources of information 
Great and endunng avlhzattons hke those of the Hmdus and 
Chinese bwlt upon tlus foundatwn and devoloped from 
it a d,sc,pline of self-knowledge which they brought 
to a high pitch of refinement both in pbtlosophy and m 
pract,ce, 
A high regard for the uncODSC1ous psyche as a source of 
knowledge is by no means such a delUS1on as our Westem 
rationahsm. hkes to suppose. We are mchned to assume 
that, in the last resort, all knowledge comes from without. 
Yet today we know for certain that the unconscious contains 
contents wlnch would mean an unmeasurable mcrease of 
knowledge if they could only be made consc10US Modem 
investigatwn of anunal mstinct, as for example m msects, 
has brought together a nch fond of empmcal findmgs wluch 
show that if man acted as certain msects do he would possess 
a lugh.er mtelhgence than at present, It cannot, of course, 
be proved that msects possess conscious knowledge, but 
common-sense cannot doubt that theu' unconsaous acb.on­
pattems are psychic functions. Man's unconsclOUS hkewise 
contains all the patterns of hfe and behaviour inherited 
from h1S ancestors, so that every human child, pnor to 
consciousness, is possessed of a potential system of adapted 
psychic lunclloning In the conscious hfe of the adult, as 
well, this unconscious, instinctive functwning is al.ways 
present and actJ.ve In this achvity all the functions of the 
conscwus psyche are prepared for. The 1lll.COilSC10US per­
ceives, has purpooes and intmllnns, feels and tlnnks as does 
the conscious mind We find sufficient evidence for this 
in the field of psycho-pathology and the invesllgation of 
dream-processes. Only m one respect is there an essential 
difference between the conscious and the llDCODSClous 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 2r5 
functioning of the psyche. Wlule conscwusness is mtens.1ve 
and concentrated, 1t is tra.nsJ.ent and is directed upon the 
unmediate present and the immediate field of attention ; 
moreover, it has access only to matenal that represents one 
indivuiual's experience stretching over a few decades. A 
wider range of "memory" is artificially acqwred and conSJSts 
mostly of prmted paper But matters stand very differently 
with the unconscious. It JS not concentrated and mtensive, 
but shades off into obscurity ; it is highly extensive and can 
Juxtapose the most heterogeneous elements in the most 
paradoncal way. More than this, 1t contains, besides an 
indeterminable number of subhmmal perceptions, an im­
mense fund of accumulated inheritance-factors left by one 
generation of men after another, whose mere ex1Stence 
marks a step in the differentiation of the species If it were 
penrussible to persomfy the unconscious, we might call it a 
collective human being combining the characteristics of both 
sexes, transcend.mg youth and age, birth and death, and, 
from having at his command a human experience of one or 
two nnlhon years, almost immortal. If such a bemg existed, 
he would be exalted above all temporal change , the present 
would mean neither more nor less to him than any year 10 
the one hundredth century before Chnst , he would be a 
dreamer of age-old dreams and, owing to Ins immeasurable 
experience, he would be an incomparable prognosticator 
He would have lived countless tJ.mes over the life of the 
inchvidual, of the fanuly, tribe and people, and he would 
possess tbe living sense of the rhythm of growth, flowering 
and decay. 
Unfortnnately-or rather let us say, fortnnately-tlus 
being dreams. At least it seems to us as if the collective 
unconscious, w1uch appeus to us m dreams, had no con-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comzr6 POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
sciousness of 1ts own contents----though of course we cannot 
be sure of this, any more than we are m the case of insects. 
The collective unconscious, moreover, seems not to be a 
peBOII, but something like an unceasing stream or perhaps 
an ocean of images and figures which drift into consciousness 
in our dreams or in abnormal states of mind 
It would be pos1tively grotesque for us to call this immense 
system of experience of the unc00SC10os psyche an illusion, 
for our visible and tangible body itself is just such a system. 
It still C8Irles withio it the discernible traces of primeval 
evolution, and it is certainly a whole that functions pur­
posively-for otherwise we could not live. It woold never 
occur to anyone to look upon comparative anatomy or 
physiology as nonsense. And so we canool dismiss the 
collective unconscious as illusion, or refuse to recognize and 
study it as a valuable source of knowledge. 
Looked at from without, the psyche appears to us to be 
essentially a reflection of external happenings-to be not 
only occasioned by them, but to have its origin m tbem. 
And 1t also seems to us that the unconscious can be under­
stood only from without and from the side of conscrousness. 
It ,s well known that Freod has attempted an explanation 
from this side-an undertaking which could only socceed 
if the unconscious were actually something which came into 
being with the existence and COOSCIDUSOeSS of the mdividual. 
But the truth is that the unconscious is always there before­
hand as a potential system of psychic functioning handed 
down by generations of man. COilSClOtlSlless is a late--bom 
desceodant of the unconscioos psyche. It would c:ertainly 
show perversity if we tried to explain the lives of OOI 
ancestors in terms of their late descendants ; and it is just 
as wrong, in my opinion, to regard the unconscious as a 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY zx7 
denvatlve of consciousness. We are nearer the truth if we 
put it the other way round. 
But this was the stzndpomt of past ages, which alwzys 
held the mdlVldual soul to be dependeut upon a world­
system of the spirit. They could not fail to do so, because 
they were aware of the untold treasure of experience lying 
hidden beneath the threshold of the transient consaousness 
of the mdiwlual These ages not only formed an hypothesis 
about the world system of the spmt, but they assumed 
without question that tins system was a being with a will 
and conscioumess--was even a person-and they called this 
being God, the qamtessence of reality. He was for them the 
most real of beings, the first cause, through whom alone the 
soul could be understood. There is psychological JUShfica­
tion for thls suppositum., for it is only appropriate to call 
divine an almost immortal being whose experience, compared 
to that of man, 1S nearly eternal 
In the loregomg I have shown where the problems he 
for a psychology that does not explam everytlung upon 
physical grounds, hut appeals to a world of the spirit whose 
active pnnc1ple IS neither matter and its quahties nor any 
state of energy, but God. We nught be tempted at this 
Juncture by modem philosophy to call eue,gy or the I/an 
vlkd God, and thus to blend into one spirit and nature. As 
long as this undertalang is xestncted to the nusty heights 
of speculative philosophy, no great harm is done But ii 
we should operate with this idea in the lower realm of 
pxactical psychology, where OUI wzy of explammg things 
bears fruit in daily conduct, we should find ourselves involved 
in the most hopeless difficulties We do not profess a 
psychology shaped to the academic taste, or seek explanations'" 
that have no bearing on We. What we want is a pracbcad 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com2r8 POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
psychology which yields approvable result~e which helps 
us to explain thmgs in a way that is Justified by the outcome 
for the patient. In practical psychotherapy we stnve to fit 
people for life, and we are not free to set up theones which 
do not concern our patients or which may even injure them. 
Here we come to a question which is often attended by 
mortal danger-the question whether we base our explana­
tions upon matter or upon spirit. We must never forget 
that everything spuitual is illUSlOll from the naturalistic 
standpoint, and that the spuit, to ensure its own existence, 
must often deny and overcome ao obtrusive, physical fact. 
If I recognize only naturalistic values, and explain every­
thing in physi,:al terms, I shall depreaate, hinder or even 
destroy the spintual development of my patients And ii I 
hold exclUS1vely to a spiritual mterpretatlon, then I shall 
misunderstand and do violence to the natural man m his 
right to existence as a physical being. More than a few 
suicides in the course of psycho-therapeutic treatment are 
to be laid at the door of such nustakes. Whether energy JS 
God, or God is energy, concerns me very little, for how, in 
any case, can I know such tlungs ;i But to give appropnate 
psychological explanations-this I must be able to do. 
The modem psychologist occupies neither the one position 
nor the other, but finds himself between the two, dangerously 
committed to " t1us as well as that "-a situation which 
invitingly opens the way to a shallow opportunism. Tins 
IS undoubtedly the danger of the ........,_. opposst.......,_ 
of intellectnal hberation from the opposites. How should 
anything but a formless and aimless UDCertainty result from 
giving eqnal valne to contradictory postulates 1 In contrast 
to this, we can readliy appreciate the advantage of an 
explanatory principle that is unequivocal. It allows of a 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 2t9 
standpoint which can serve as a point of reference. Un­
doubtedly we are confronted here with a very ddlicult 
problem. We must be able to appeal to an explanatory 
principle founded on reahty, and yet it IS no longer possible 
for tbe modern psychologist to believe exclusively in tbe 
physical aspect of reahty when once he has given tbe spiritual 
aspect its due Nor will he be able to put weight on the 
latter alone, for be cannot ignore the relative vahdity of a 
physical mterpretation. 
The following tram of thought shows my way of attempting 
tbe solutwn of tblS problem. The conllict of nature and mind 
is itself a reflection of the paradox contained in the psychic 
bemg of man. Tins reveals a material and a spuitual aspect 
which appear a contradJ.cban as long as we fall to under­
stand the nature of psychic life. Whenever, with our human 
understanding, we must pronounce upon something that we 
have not grasped or cannot grasp, then-if we are honest­
we must be willing to contnuhct ourselves, and we must 
pull tlus something mto its ant1thettcal parts m order to 
deal with it at all. The confhct of the matenal and spiritual 
aspects of hfe only shows that the psych.le is m the .last 
resort an incomprehensible something. Without a doubt 
psycluc happenings constitute our only, immediate ex­
penence All that I experience 1!I psyclnc. Even physical 
pain is a psycluc event that belongs to my expenence My 
sense-1D1press1ons-for all that they force upon me a world 
of impenetrable objects occupymg space-are psyclnc images, 
and these alone are my immediate experience, for they alone 
are the immediate obJects of my consciousness. My own 
psyche even transforms and fa.IsJ.fies reality, and it does this 
to such a degree that I must resort to artificial means to 
determme what things are hire apart from myself. Then I 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com220 POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
discover that a tone is a vibration of the all" of such and such 
a frequency, or that a colour is a wave-length of hght of such 
and such a length. We are m all truth so enclosed by psychic 
images that we cannot penetrate to the essence of things 
external to ourselves. All our knowledge is conditioned 
by the psyche which, because it alone is immedlate, is 
superlatively real. Here there is a reality to which the 
psychologist can appeal-namely, psychic reality. 
If we go more deeply into the meaning of this concept, it 
seems to us that certain psycluc contents or images are 
derived from a material environment to which our bodies 
also belong, whJle others, which are m no way less real, 
seem to come from a mental source which appears to be very 
different from the physical enVU'Onment Whether I picture 
to myself the car I WWl to buy, or try to imagme the state 
in wluch the soul of my dead father now is-whether 1t is an 
external fact or a thought that occupies me-both happen­
ings are psycluc reahty. The only drl'ference is that one 
psychic happening refers to the physical world, and the 
other to the mental world. If I change my concept of 
reality in such a way as to admit that all psychu: happenings 
are real-and no other use of the concept is vahd-tlus puts 
an end to the conflict of matter and mind as contradictory 
explanatory principles. Each becomes a mere designation 
for the particular soorce of the psychic contents that crowd 
into my field of consciousness. If a fire burns me I do not 
questioo the reality of the fire, whereas if I am beset by the 
fear that a ghost will appear, I take refuge behind the 
thought that it is only an illusion. But just as the fire is the 
psyclnc image of a physical process whose nature is unknown 
so my fear of the gh01t is a psychic image from a mental 
source ; it is just as real as the fire, for my fear is as real as 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 22z 
the pain caused by the fire As for the mental process that 
:6nally underlies my fear of the ghost-it IS as unknown to 
me as the nltimate nature of matter. And just as 1t never 
occurs to me to account for the nature of :fire except by the 
concepts of chennstry and physu:s, so I would never think 
of trying to explain my fear of ghosts except in terms of 
mental processes. 
The fact that all immediate experience is psychic and that 
immediate reality can only be psychic, explains why 1t IS 
that primitive man puts the appearance of ghosts and the 
effects of magic on a plane with physical events. He has not 
yet tom his naive expenences into their antithetical parts 
In his world mind and matter still interpenetrate each other, 
and his gods still wander through forest and field He is hke 
a child, only half-born, still enclosed in a dream-state within 
his own psyche and the world as it actually is, a world not 
yet dlStorted by the difliculhes m undershmdmg that beset 
a dawning mtelhgence When the prumtlve world dis­
integrated mto spmt and nature, the West rescued nature 
for itseli It was prone to a belief in nature, and 
only became the more entangled m it with every painful 
effort to make itself spmtual The East, on the contrary, 
took mind for 1ts own, and by explaining away matter as 
mere illusion (maya}, contmued to dream in Asiatic filth and 
misery But smce there is only one earth and om mankind, 
East and West cannot rend humanity into two different 
halves. Psychic reahty exists 1n its onginal oneness, and 
awaits man's advance to a level of COllSClousness where he 
no longer believes in the one part and denies the other, but 
recognizes both as constituent elements of one psyche. 
We may well point to the ulea of psycluc reality as the 
most important achievement of modero psychology, though 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com222 POSTULATE.~ OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
it is scarcely recognized as such. It seems to me only a 
question of time for this idea to be generally accepted. It 
mast be accepted, for 1t alone enables us to do justice to 
psychic manifestations in all their variety and uniqueness. 
Without this idea it is unavoidable that we should explain 
our psychic experiences m a way that does violence to a 
good half of them, while with 1t we can give its due to that 
side of psychic experience which expresses itself in super­
stition and mythology, religion and philosophy And thts 
aspect of psychic life is not to be undervalued. Truth that 
appeals to the testimony of the senses may satisfy reason, 
but it offers nothmg that stirs our feelings and expresses 
them by givmg a meanmg to human hfe. Yet it IS most 
often feeling that is decisive m matters of good and evil, 
and if feeling does not come to the aid of reason, the latter 
is usually powerless. DW. reason and good mtentions save 
us from the World War, or have they ever saved us from 
any other c.atastrophic nonsense ? Have any of the great 
spiritual and social revolutions sprung from reasoning-let 
us say the transformation of the Grzco-Roman world into 
the age of feudalism, or the explosive spread of Islamic 
culture 1 
As a physician I am of course not directly concerned with 
these world-questions , my duties lie with people who are 
ill. Medicine has until recently gone on the supposition 
that illness should be treated and cured by itself , yet vmces 
are now heard wluch declare this view to be wrong, and 
demand the treatment of the sick person. and not of the 
illness. The same demand is forced upon us in the treatment 
of psychic suffering. More and more we tum our attention 
from the visible disease and direct it upon the man as a 
whole. We have come to understand that psychic suffering 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 223 
is not a definitely localized, sharply delimited phenomenon, 
but rather the symptom of a wrong attitude assumed by the 
total personality. We can therefore not hope for a thorough 
cure to result from a treatment restricted to the trouble 
itself, but only from a treatment of the pe,sonality as a 
whole. 
I am reminded of a case which is very instructive in this 
connection. It concerns a highly intelligent young man who 
had worked out a detaJ.led analysis of his own neW"OSlS after 
a senous study of medical hterature. He brought me his 
findings in the form of a precise and well-written monograph 
fit for publication, and asked me to read the manuscript and 
to tell 1nm why he was not cured He should have been 
according to the verdict of scrence as he understood it 
After reading Ins monograph I was forced to grant bun 
that, 1f it were only a question of insight into the causal 
connections of a neurosis, he should m all truth be cured. 
Smee he was not, I supposed tlus must be due to the fact 
that Ins attitude to We was somehow fundamentally wrong 
-thongh I had to admit that Ins symptoms did not betray 
1t In reading his account of Ins life I had noticed that he 
often spent his winters at St Moritz or Nice. I therefore 
asked him who paid for these hohdays, and it thereupon 
came out that a poor school-teacher who loved hun had 
cruelly depnved herself to mdulge the young man in these 
visits to pleasure-resorts. His want of conscience was the 
cause of his neurosis, and it is not hard to see why scumtific 
understanding failed to help bim. His fundamental error 
lay in lus moral attitude. He found my way of looking at 
the question shockingly unscientific, for morals have nothing 
to do with science He supposed that, by invoking scientific 
thought, he could spirit away the immorahty which he 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com224 POSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
himself could not stomach He would not even admit that 
a conflict existed, because Ins DUStress gave him the money 
of her free will. 
We can take what scientific pos1t10n we choose, there 
remains the fact that the large majonty of civilized persons 
sunply cannot tolerate such behaviour The moral attitude 
is a real factor in hie with which the psychologist must 
reckon 1f he is not to commit the gravest errors. The 
psychologist must also remember that certain religious 
conVIctions not founded on reason are a necessity of life 
for many persons. It is again a matter of psychic rea.hties 
which can cause and cure diseases. How often have I heard 
a patient exclaun · " If only I knew that my life had some 
mea.mng and purpose, then there would be no silly story 
about my nerves I " Whether the person in question is 
rich or poor, has fanuly and social posttlon or not, alters 
nothmg, for outer circumstances are far from giving his We 
a meaning. It is much more a question of Ins unreasoned 
need of what we call a spiritual hfe, and this he cannot obtain 
from universities, libranes, or even churches He cannot 
accept what these have to offer because it touches only 
his head, and does not stir his heart. In such cases, the 
physician's recogmtion of the spmtual factors in thelI' true 
light is vitally important, and the patient's unconscious 
helps Jum in his need by producing dreams whose contents 
are undeniably religious. Not to recognize the spmtual 
source of such contents means faulty treatment and failure. 
General conceptions of a spiritual nature are indispensable 
constituents of psychic life. We can point them out among 
all peoples whose level of consciousness makes them in some 
degree articulate. Their relative absence or their deoial by 
• civilized people is themore tn be regarded as • sign of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPOSTULATES OF ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY 225 
degeneration Whereas m its development up to the present 
psychology has dealt cluefly with psych.J.c processes in the 
hght of physu:al causatioo, the future task of psychology 
will be the mvestigation of their spiritual detemunants But 
the natural history of the mind is no further advanced today 
than was natural science m the tlu.rteenth century. We 
have only begun to take scientdic note of our spmtual 
experiences. 
If modern psychology can boast of hawtg removed any 
of the covenngs wluch concealed the picture of the human 
psyche, 1t IS only that one wluch htd from the mvesbgator 
its biological aspect We may compare the pre.sent situation 
with the state of medlcme m the sixteenth century, when 
people began to study anatomy but had not as yet even the 
famtest idea of physmlogy The spmtual aspect of the 
psyche is at present known to us only ma fragmentary way. 
We have learned that there are spmtually conditwned. 
processes of transformatwn m the psyche which underhe, 
for example, the well-known 1n1tiatton ntes of primitive 
peoples and the states induced by the prachce of Hindu 
yoga But we have not yet succeeded m determining their 
particular urufomutles or laws. We only know that a large 
part of the neuroses anse from a disturbance m these pro­
cesses Psychological research has not as yet drawn a.side 
all the many veils from the pu:ture of the human psyche , 
1t remams as unapproachable and obscure as all the deep 
secrets of hfe. We can speak only of what we have tried 
to do, and what we hope to do m the future, in the way of 
attempting a solution of the great riddle 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comX 
THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN ' 
THE spiritual problem of modem man is one of those ques­
tions which belong so intimately to the present m which we 
are living that we cannot Judge of them fully. The modem 
man is a newly formed human being , a modern problem is 
a question which has just ansen and whose answer lies in 
the future. In speakmg, therefore, of the spmtual problem 
of modem man we can at most state a question-and we 
should perhaps put tins statement m duferent terms if we 
had but the faintest inkhng of the answer. The question, 
moreover, seems rather vague; but the truth is that 1t has 
to do with something so universal that it exceeds the grasp 
of any single human being. We have reason enough, there­
fore, to approach such a problem. with true moderation and 
with the greatest caution. I am deeply convinced of tlus, 
and wish it stressed the more because it is just such problems 
which tempt us to use high-sounding words-and because 
I shall myxlf be forced to say certain things which may 
sound immoderate and incautious 
To begin at once with an example of such apparent lack 
of caution, I must say that the man we call modern, the man 
who is aware of the immediate present, is by no means the 
average man, He is rather the man who stands upon a 
1 The author has made aome change• 1n tlua essay 11nce 1b publication 
ID German (Tnma ) 
••6 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 227 
peak, or at the very edge of the world. the abyss of the future 
before him, above him the heavens, and below him the 
whole of ma.nkmd with a history that disappears in primeval 
mists. The mcxlern man-or, let us say agam, the man of 
the immediate present-is rarely met with. There are few 
who hve up to the name, for they must be conscious to a 
superlative degree Since to be wholly of the present means 
to be fully conscious of one's existence as a man, it requires 
the most mt.ensive and extensive consciousness, with a 
minimum of unconsciousness. It must be clearly understood 
that the mere fact of living in the present does not make a 
man modem, for in that case everyone at present ahve would 
be so. He alone is modern who is fully cODSC1ous of the 
present 
The man whom we can with Justice call " modern " is 
solitary. He is so of necessity and at all tunes, for every 
step towards a fuller consciousness of the present removes 
1nm further from bis origmal " parimpall01I mystup,, " 
with the mass of men-from submermon m a common 
unconSCiousness Every step forward means an act of 
tearing lnmself loose from that all-embracing, pristine 
UDCODSClOUSDess which claims the bulk of mankind almost 
entirely. Even in our civilizations the people who fonn, 
psychologu:a.lly speaking, the lowest stratum, live almost as 
unconsciously as primlhve races Those of the succeeding 
stratum manifest a level of conSCiousness which corresponds 
to the begimrlngs of human culture, while those of the 
highest stratum have a consciousness capable of keeping step 
with the life of the last few centuries. Only the man who is 
modem in our meaning of the tenn really lives in the present ; 
he alone has a present-day consciousness, and he alone finds 
that the ways of life which correspond to earlier levels pall 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com228 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
upon him Toe values and strivings of those past worlds 
no longer interest him save from the historical standpoint. 
Thus be has become " unlllstorical " in the deepest sense and 
hss estranged himself from the mass of men who live entirely 
within the bounds of tradition. Indeed, be is completely 
modem only when he has come to the very edge of the world, 
leaving behind him all that hss been chscarded and outgrown, 
and acknowledging that be stands before a void out of which 
all things may grow. 
These words may be thought to be but empty sound, and 
their meaning reduced to mere banality Nothmg is easier 
than to affect a consciousness of the present. As a matter 
of fact, a great horde of worthless people give themselves 
the air of bemg modem by overleapmg the vanous stages 
of development and the tasks of We they represent. They 
appear suddenly by the side of the truly modem man 
as uprooted human beings, bloodsucking ghosts, whose 
emptiness is taken for the unenviable lonehness of the 
modern man and casts discredlt upon bun He and }us 
kind, few m number as they are, are hidden from the un­
discerning eyes of mass-men by those clouds of ghosts, the 
pseudo-modems. It cannot be helped : the " modern " 
man is ques'b.onable and suspect, and has always been so, 
even in the past. 
An honest profession of modermty means voluntanly 
declaring bankruptcy, taking the vows of poverty and 
chastity in a new sense, and-what is still more painful­
renouncing the halo which history bestows as a mark of its 
sanction. To be " unhistorical " 1S the Promethean sm, 
and in this sense modern man lives in sm. A higher level 
of consciousness IS like a burden of guilt. But, as I have said, 
only the man who has outgrown the stages of cODSCJ.ousness 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 229 
belonging to the past and has amply lulfilled the dutres 
appomted for mm by his world, can achieve a full conscious-­
ness of the present. To do this he must be sound and pro­
ficient in the best sense-a man who has aclueved as 
much as other people, and even a little more It is these 
quahtles which enable him to gain the next highest level 
of consciousness. 
I know that the idea of proficiency is especially repugnant 
to the pseudo-modems, for it remmds them unpleasantly 
of their deceits. Tins, however, cannot prevent us from 
taking 1t as our critenon of the modem man. We are even 
forced to do so, for unless he is profi.cient, the man who claims 
to be modem is nothing but an unscrupulous gambler. He 
must be proficient m the highest degree, for wtless he can 
atone by creative ability for his break with tradihon, he 1s 
merely disloyal to the past It is sheer Juggling to look 
upon a derual of the past as the same tlung as consciousness 
of the present. "Today" stands between "yesterday" 
and " tomorrow ", and fonns a hnk between past and 
future ; 1t has no other mea.nmg. The present represents 
a process of transJ.hon, and that man may account lnmself 
modern who 1s conscious of it m t1us sense. 
Many people call themselves modem-especially the 
pseudo-modems. Therefore the really modem man is often 
to be found among those who call themselves old-fashioned 
He takes tlns stand for sufficient reasons. On the one hand 
he emphasizes the past in order to hold the scales against 
lus break with trachtion and that effect of gutlt of wluch I 
have spoken. On the other hand he wishes to avoid bemg 
taken for a pseudo-modem. 
Every good quality has 11s bad side, and nothing that 1s 
good can come mto the world without directly producmg 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com230 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
a corresponcling evil. This is a painfal fact. Now there is 
the danger that consciousness of the present may Iea.d to an 
elation based upon illusion: the illusion, namely, that we 
are the culmination of the history of mankind, the fulfilment 
aod the end-product of countless centuries. If we grant 
this, we should understand that it is no more than the proud 
acknowledgement of onr destitution we are also the dis­
appointment of the hopes aod expectatrons of the ag,,s. 
Think of nearly two thousand years of Christian ideals 
followed, instead of by the return of the Messiah aod the 
heavenly millennium, by the World War among Christian 
nations and its barbed-wire and poison-gas What a 
catastrophe in heaven and on earth I 
In the face of such a picture we may well grow humble 
again. It is true that modern man is a cuhrunation, but 
tomorrow he will be surpassed , he is indeed the end­
product of an age-old development, but he is at the same 
time the worst conceivable chsappointment of the hopes of 
humankind. The modem man is aware of this. He has 
seen how beneficent are science, technology and organization, 
but also how catastropluc they can be He has likewise seen 
that well-meaning governments have so thoroughly paved 
the way for peace on the principle " in tnne of peace prepare 
for war ", that Europe has nearly gone to rack and ruin. 
And as for ideals, the Christian church, the brotherhood of 
man, international social democracy and the "solidarity .. 
of economic interests have all failed to stand the bap­
tism of fire-the test of reality. Today, fifteen years 
after the war, we observe once more the same optimism, 
the same organization, the same political aspirations, the 
same phrases and catch-words at work. How can we but 
fear that they will inevitably lead to further catastrophes 1 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 231 
Agreements to outlaw war leave us scepbcal, even while we 
wish them all poss1ble success. At bottom, behind every 
such palha.b.ve measure, there lS a gnawing doubt. On the 
whole, I believe I am not exaggerating when I say that 
modem man has suffered an ahnost fatal shock, psycho­
logically speakiDg, and as a result has fallen into profound 
uncertainty 
These statements, I believe, make it clear enough that my 
being a phym.cia.n has coloured my views. A doctor always 
spies out diseases, and I cannot cease to be a doctor But 
it 18 essential to the physician's art that he should not dis­
cover diseases where none exists I will therefore not make 
the assertwn that the white races m general, and occtdental 
nahons m particular, are diseased, or that the Western 
world IS on the verge of collapse. I am in no way competent 
to pass such a Judgement. 
It is of course only from my own experience with other 
persons and with mysell that I draw my knowledge of the 
spiritual problem of modern man I know somethmg of the 
intunate psycluc hfe of many hundreds of educated persons, 
both su:k and healthy, coming from every quarter of the 
civilized, wlute world , and upon this expenence I base my 
statements No doubt I can draw only a one-sided picture, 
for the things I have observed are events of psycluc life , 
they he within us-on the 1nner Side, If I may use the 
expression. I must point out that this is not always true of 
psychic hfe , the psyche 1S not always and everywhere to 
be found on the inner side. It is to be found on the outside 
in whole races or periods of lustory wluch take no account 
of psychic life as such As examples we may choose any of 
the ancient cultures, but especially that of Egypt with its 
imposmg obJectivity and its naive confession of sms that 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com232 IBE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
have not been committed 1 We can no more feel the 
Pyrannds and the Apis tombs of Sa.kkara to be expressions 
of personal problems or personal emotions, than we can feel 
this of the music of Bach 
Whenever there is estabbshed an external form, be it 
ritual or spiritual, by which all the yeanunss and hopes of 
the soul are adequately expressed-as for instance in some 
hving rehgion-then we may say that the psyche is outside, 
and no spiritual problem, stnctly speaking, exists In 
consonance with this truth, the development of psychology 
falls entirely within the last decades, although long before 
that man was introspectlve and mtelhgent enough to 
recognize the facts that are the subJect-matter of psychology. 
The same was the case with techmcal knowledge The 
Romans were familiar with all the mechanical pnnciples and 
physical facts on the basis of which they could have con­
structed the steam-engme, but all that came of 1t was the 
toy made by Hero of Ale:xandna There was no urgent 
necessity to go further. It was the division of labour and 
speciahzatJ.on m the nineteenth century wluch gave rise to 
the need to apply all available knowledge So also a 
spin tu.al need has produced m our tune our "discovery" of 
psychology There has never, of course, been a tune when 
the psyche did not mamfest 1tseli, but formerly it attracted 
no attention-no one noticed it People got along without 
heeding it But today we can no longer get along unless 
we give our best attentum to the ways of the psyche. 
It was men of the medical professwn who were the first 
to notice this ; for the pnest 1S concerned only to estabhsh 
1 Accorduag to Egyphon trac:btion, when the dead man meets lus Judges 
m the underworld, ho makes a detaded conft,HJOD of tbe en.mes be ha.• •ol 
comm1tted, but leave, untne11boned ba actnal mm (T""" I 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTiiE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 233 
an undisturbed functionmg of the psyche within a recognized 
system of behef As long as tlns system gives true expression 
to hfe, psychology can be nothmg but a technical ad1uvant 
to healthy hving, and the psyche cannot be regarded as a 
problem in itself While man still lives as a herd-being he 
has no " things of the spirit " of hlS own , nor does he need 
any, save the usual belief in the unmortahty of the soul. 
But as soon as he has outgrown whatever local form of 
religion he was born to-as soon as tlus religion can no 
longer embrace blS hfe m all its fulness-then the psyche 
becomes something in its own nght winch cannot be dealt 
with by the measures of the Church alone It is for tins 
reason that we of today have a psychology founded on 
experience, and not UJX>n articles of faith or the postulates 
of any plulosophlCal system. The very fact that we have 
such a psychology lS to me symptomatic of a profound 
convuhnon of spmtual hfe Disruption m the spintual hfe 
of an age shows the same pattern as racb.cal change m an 
individual. As long as all goes well and psychic energy finds 
its application m adequate and well-regulated ways, we are 
d1Sturbed by nothing from within No uncertainty or doubt 
besets us, and we cannot be dlVlded against ourselves But 
no sooner are one or two of the channels of psyc1nc achVJty 
blocked, than we are remmded of a stream that is dammed 
up. The current flows backward to its source , the inner 
man wants something wluch the V1S1ble man does not want, 
and we are at war WJ.th ourselves Only then, in this distress, 
do we discover the psyche, or, more precisely, we come upon 
somethmg which thwarts our will, which is strange and even 
hosttle to us, or winch is incompatible with our conscious 
standpomt. Freud's psychoanalytic labours show this 
process 1n the clearest way. The very first thmg he d!scovered 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com•34 TiiE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
was the existence of sexually pervene and criminal fantasies 
which at their face value are wholly mcompatible with the 
conscious outlook of a Civilized man. A person who was 
activated by them would be nothing less than a mutineer, 
a criminal or a madman 
We cannot suppose that this aspect of the unconsaous or 
of the hinterland of man's mmd is sometlung totally new 
Probably it has always been there, in every culture Each 
culture gave birth to its destru.ctive opposite, but no culture 
or civilization before our own was ever forced to take these 
psychic undercurrents in deadly earnest. Psychic hie always 
found expression in a metaphysical system of some sort 
But the conscious, modem man, despite bis strenuous and 
dogged efforts to do so, can no longer refrain from acknow­
ledjpng the might of psyclnc forces. This distingwshes our 
time from all others We can no longer deny that the dark 
stimngs of the unconscious are effective powers-that 
psychic forces exist wluch cannot, for the present at least, 
be fitted in with our rational world-order We have even 
enlarged our study of these forces to a science--one more 
proof of the earnest attention we bring to them Previous 
centuries could throw them aside unnoticed , for us they 
are a slurt of Nessus wlnch we cannot stnp off. 
The revolution in our conscious outlook, brought about 
by the catastrophic results of the World War. shows itself 
in our inner life by the shattering of our faith m ourselves 
and our own worth. We used to regard foreigners-the 
other side---<is political and moral reprobates ; but the 
modern man is forced to recognize that he 1S politically and 
morally just hke anyune else. Whereas I formerly believed 
it to be my bounden duty to call other persons ta order, I 
now admit that I need calling to order myself. I admit this 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRIWAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 235 
the more readily because I reahze only too well that I am 
losing my faith m the possibility of a rational organization 
of the world, that old dream of the millennium, in which 
peace and harmony should rule, has grown pale. The modem 
man's scept1cism regarding all such matters has clulled his 
enthusiasm for politics and world-reform , more than that, 
it does not favour any smooth application of psychic energies 
to the outer world Through his scepticism the modern man 
is thrown back upon hunself , his energies flow towards 
their source and wash to the surface those psychic contents 
which are at all tunes there, but he hidden in the silt as long 
as the stream flows smoothly in its course. How totally 
different did the world appear to medm!val man I For him 
the earth was eternally fixed and at rest m the centre of the 
universe, encircled by the course of a sun that solicitously 
bestowed its warmth. Men were all children of God under 
the loving care of the Most High, who prepared them for 
eternal blessedness , and all knew exactly what they should 
do and how they should conduct themselves in order to rise 
from a corrupb.ble world to an mcorruptible and joyous 
existence. Such a life no longer seems real to us, even in 
our dreams. Natural science has long ago torn this lovely 
veil to shreds. That age lies as far behind as cluldhood, 
when one's own father was unquestionably the handsomest 
and strongest man on earth 
The modern man has lost all the metaphysical certainties 
of Ins medbeval brother, and set up in their place the ideals 
of material secunty, general welfare and humaneness But 
it takes more than an ordinary dose of optimism to make it 
appear that these ulea.b are still unshaken Material security. 
even, has gone by the board, for the modem man begins 
to see that every step in material "progress" adds just so 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com236 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
much force to the threat of a more stupendous catastrophe. 
The very picture terronzes the imagination. What are we 
to imagine when cities today perfect measures of defence 
against poison-gas attacks and practise them m " dress 
rehearsals " ? We cannot but suppose that such attacks 
have been planned and provided lor----agai.n on the principle 
" in time of peace prepare for war ". Let man but accumu­
late his materials of destruction and the devil within him 
will soon be unable to resist putting them to theu- fated use. 
It IS well known that fire-arms go off of themselves if only 
enough of them are together. 
An intunation of the law that governs blind contingency, 
which Heraclitus called the rule of enant,otlf'omsa (conversion 
into the opposite}, now steals upon the modem man through 
the by-ways of blS mind, chilling him with fear and paralysing 
lus faith m the 1astmg effectiveness of social and pohbcal 
measures in the face of these monstrous forces. If he turns 
away from the terrifymg prospect of a bhnd world in which 
building and destroymg successively tlp the scale, and 1f he 
then turns his gaze inward upon the recesses of his own mind, 
he will d.J.scover a chaos and a darkness there which be would 
gladly ignore. Science has destroyed even the refuge of the 
inner life. What was once a sheltering haven has become a 
place of terror. 
And yet 1t lS ahnost a relief for us to come upon so much 
evil in the depths of our own minds We are able to believe, 
at least, that we have discovered the root of the evil in 
mankind Even though we are shocked and disillusioned at 
first, we yet feel, because these things are manifestations of 
our own minds, that we hold them more or less m our own 
hands and can therefore correct or at least effecb.vely suppress 
them We like to assume that, d we succeeded in this~ we 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 237 
should have rooted out some fraction of the evil in the world. 
We like to trunk that, on the basis of a widespread knowledge 
of the unconscious and its ways, no one could be deceived. 
by a statesman who was unaware of hIS own bad motives ; 
the very newspapers would pull bun up " Please have 
yoUISe!f analysed , you are suflenng from a repressed 
father-complex." 
I have purposely chooen tlus grotesque example to show 
to what absurdities we are led by the illusion that because 
somethmg 1s psychic 1t is under our control It is, however, 
true that much of the evil m the world IS due to the fact 
that man m general js hopelessly unconscious, as 1t is also 
true that WJ.th mcrea.smg iI1SJght we can combat this evil at 
its source m ourselves As science enables us to deal with 
mJuries mfucted from without, so 1t helps us to treat those 
ansmg from withm. 
The rapid and world-wide growth of a " psychological " 
mterest over the last two decades shows umrustakably that 
modem man has to some extent turned lus attention from 
matenal tlnngs to hts own sub1ect1ve processes. Should we 
call this mere cuTI.OSJ.ty? At any rate, art has a way of 
anhcJ.patmg future changes m man's fundamental outlook, 
and expressionist art has taken thIS subJectJ.ve tum well m 
advance of the more general change 
This " psychological " interest of the present time shows 
that man expects something from psychic hfe wluch be has 
not received from the outer world somethmg wluch our 
rehg:i.ons, doubtless, ought to contain, but no longer do 
contain-at least for the modem man The vanous fonns of 
religion no longer appear to the modem man to come from 
within-to be expressions of lus own psycluc hfe ; for hun 
they are to be classed with the things of the outer world. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com238 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
He is vouchsafed no revelation of a spirit that 1s not of tlns 
world ; but he tries on a nwnber of religions and convictions 
as if they were Sunday attire, only to lay them aside agru.n 
like worn-out clothes. 
Yet he is somehow fascmated by the ahnost pathological 
manifestations of the unconscious mind. We must adrmt 
the fact, however difficult it is for us to understand that 
something which previous ages have discarded should 
suddenly command our attention. That there 1S a general 
interest in these matters is a troth which cannot be dented, 
their offence to good taste notwithstanding. I am not 
thinking merely of the interest taken in psychology as a 
science, or of the still narrower mterest in the psychoanalysis 
of Freud, but of the widespread interest mall sorts of psychic 
phenomena as marufested m the growth of spintualism, 
astrology, theosophy, and so forth. The world has seen 
nothtng hke it smce the end of the seventeenth century. 
We can compare it only to the flowering of Gnostic thought 
in the first and second centunes after Christ. The spintual 
currents of the present have, m fact, a deep affinity with 
Gnosticism. There is even a Gnostic church in France 
today, and I know of two schools in Germ.any wluch openly 
declare themselves Gnostic. The modern movement which 
is numerically most impressive 1s undoubtedly Theosophy, 
together with its continental sister, Anthroposophy; these 
are pure Gnosticism in a Hindu dress. Compared with these 
movements the interest in scientific psychology is negligible. 
What is striking about Gnostic systems is that they are 
based exclusively upon the manifestations of the unconscious, 
and that their moral teachings do not baulk at the shadow­
side of life. Even in the fonn of its European reVIval, the 
Hindu Kundalusi-Yoga shows this clearly. And as every 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 239 
person informed on the subject of occultism will testify, the 
statement holds true in this field as well. 
The pass10nate mterest in these movements arises un­
doubtedly from psychic energy which can no longer be 
invested in obsolete forms of religion. For tins reason such 
movements have a truly rehglous character, even when they 
pretend to be scienWic It changes nothing when Rudolf 
Steiner calls his Anthroposophy "spintual SCleD.ce '', or 
Mrs. Eddy discovers a .. Chnsban Science". These attempts 
at concealment merely show that rehgion has grown suspect 
-almost as suspect as politics and world-reform. 
I do not believe that I am gOlllg too far when I say that 
modern man, in contrast to lus nineteenth-century brother, 
turns his attention to the psyche with very great expecta­
tions ; and that he does so without reference to any tradi­
tional creed, but rather in the Gnostic sense of rehgious 
expenence We should be wrong m seeing mere caricature 
or masquerade when the movements already mentioned try 
to give themselves scientrlic 8J.I'S , their domg so lS rather an 
mdication that they are actually pursuing " science " or 
knowledge instead of the /•uh wluch 1S the essence of Western 
rehgiuns. The modern man abhors dogmatic postulates 
taken on faith and the rehgwns based upon them He holds 
them vahd only in so far as their knowledge-content seems 
to accord With his own experience of the deeps of psyclnc 
life He wants to know-to expenence for himself Dean 
Inge of St. Paul's has called attention to a movement in the 
Anglican Church with snnilar objectives. 
The age of discovery has only just come to a close in our 
day when no part of the earth remains unexplored • it 
began when men would no longer bel,..,. that the Hyper­
boreans inhabited the land of eternal sunshine, but wanted 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com240 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
to find out and to see with their own eyes what existed 
beyond the boundaries of the known world. Our age is 
apparently bent on discovering what eX1Sts m the psyche 
outside of consciousness. The questwn asked in every 
spintualistic circle is : What happens when the medium 
has lost oomciousness ? Every Theosophist asks : What 
shall I experience at higher levels of consciouaness ? The 
question which every astrologer puts is this : What are the 
effective forces and determinants of my fate beyond the 
reach of my CODSClOUS intenbon ? And every psychoanalyst 
wants to know : What are the unconscJ.Ous dnves behind 
the neuI'OSlS ;, 
Our age wishes to have actual expenences m psyclnc hfe. 
It wants to expenence for itself, and not to make assumptions 
based on the experience of other ages. Yet tlus does not 
preclude its trying anything m a hypothetical way-for 
instance, the recogmzed rehgions and the genuine SC1ences. 
The European of yesterdaywill leel a slight shudder run down 
his spme when he gazes at all deeply mto these delvmgs 
Not only does he consider the subJect of this research all too 
obscure and uncanny, but even the methods employed seem 
to hlln a shocking misuse of man's finest mtell.ectual attain­
ments. What can we expect an astronomer to say when he 
is told that at least a thousand horoscopes are drawn today 
to one three hundred years ago 1 What will the educator 
and the advocate of pbtlooophical enlightenment say to the 
fact that the world has not been freed of one single super­
stitwn since Greek antiquity ? Freud h11nsell, the founder 
of psychoanalysis, has thrown a glaring light upon the dirt, 
darkness and evil of the psychic hmterland, and has presented 
these things as so much refuse and slag , he has thus taken 
the utmost pams to discourage people from seeking anything 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 24, 
behind them. He did not succeed, and his warning has even 
brought about the very thing he wished to preveot · it has 
awakened m many people an admiratlon for all this filth. 
We are tempted to call this sheer perversity, and we could 
hardly explain 1t save on the ground that it is not a love of 
dirt, but the fascinatioo of the psyche, wlucll draws these 
people. 
There can be no doubt that from the beginning of the 
mneteenth century-from the memorable years of the French 
Revolution onwards-man has given a more and more 
promment place to the psyche, his mcreasmg attentiveness 
to 1t being the measure of 1ts growing attraction for him. 
The enthronement of the Goddess of Reason m Notre Dame 
seems to have been a symbohc gesture of great significance 
to the Western world-rather like the hewing down of 
Wotan's oak by the Chnstian m1ss10nanes For then, as at 
the Revolut10n, no avengang bolt from heaven struck the 
blasphemer down. 
It IS certainly more than an amusing comcidence that Just 
at that tune a Frenchman, Anquettl du Perron, was livmg 
m India, and, 1n the early eighteen-hundreds, brought back 
with bun a translation of the Oujmek'hat-a collect1on of 
fifty Upanishads-whu:h gave the Western world its first 
deep insight into the baflhng mind of the East To the 
historian this IS mere chance without any factors of cause 
and effect But m view of my medical experience I cannot 
take it as accident. It seems to me rather to satisfy a 
psychological law whose validity m personal bfe, at least, is 
complete. For every piece of conscious hfe that loses its 
importance and value-so runs the law-there anses a 
compensatJ.On in the unconscious. We may see in this an 
analogy to the conservation of energy in the physical world. 
Q 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com24z THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
for our psychic processes have a quantitative aspect also. 
No psychic value czn disappear without being replaced by 
another of equivalent intensity. This lS a rule wlu.ch finds 
its pragmatJ.c sanction ID the dally practice of the psycho­
therapist ; it is repeatedly venfied. and never falls. Now the 
doctor in me refuses point blank to CODSld.er the Ide of a 
people as something that does not conform to psychological 
law. A people, in the doctor's eyes, presents only a some­
what more complex picture of psychic bfe thau the mdividual 
Moreover, taking it the other way round, bas not a poet 
spoken of the" nations" of his soul' And quite correctly, 
as 1t seems to me, for m one of its aspects the psyche IS not 
individual, but ts denved from the nation, from collectivity, 
or from humanity even. In some way or other we are part 
of an all-embracmg psycluc life, of a smgle " greatest " man, 
to quote Swedenborg. 
And so we can draw a parallel Just as m me, a single 
human being, the darkness calls forth the helpful light, so 
does it also m the psychic We of a people In the crowds 
that poured into N6tre Dame, bent on destructlon, dark and 
nameless forces were at work that swept the mdiVldual off 
his feet ; these forces worked also upon Anquettl du Perron, 
and provoked an answer which bas come down in history. 
For he brought the Eastern mind to the West, and its 
influence upon us we cannot as yet measure. Let us beware 
of underestunating 1t I So far, indeed, there is httle of 1t 
to be seen in Europe on the mtellectual surface · some 
onentalists, one or two Buddhist enthusiasts, and a few 
sombre celebrities hke llladame Blavatsky and Annie Besant 
These manifestations make us think of tiny, scattered 
islands in the ocean of mankind ; in reality they are like 
the peaks of submarine mountain-fllll81'S of considerable 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comIBE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 243 
size The Philistine believed until recently that astrology 
had been d1Sposed of long since, and was sometlung that 
could be safely laughed at. But today, rising out of the 
social deeps, ,t knocks at the doors of the universities from 
which it was banished some three hundred years ago. The 
same IS true of the thought of the East : it takes root in the 
lower SOC18l levels and slowly grows to the surface Where 
did the five or six million SWlSS francs for the Anthroposophist 
temple at Domach come from ? Certainly not from one 
inchvtdual. Unfortunately there are no statistics to tell us 
the exact number of avowed Theosophists today, not to 
m.enhon the unavowed But we can be sure that there are 
several millions of them To th1S number we must add a 
few nullion Spmtuabsts of Christian or Theosophic leanings 
Great innovations never come from above ; they come 
invariably from below, 1ust as trees never grow from the 
sky downward, but upward from the earth, however true 
it is that their seeds have fallen from above The upheaval 
of our world and the upheaval m consciousness IS one and 
the same. Everything becomes relative aod therefore 
doubtful. And while man, hesitant and questioning, con­
templates a world that IS chstracted with treaties of peace 
aod pacts of friendslnp, democracy aod dictatorship, 
cap1tahsm. and Bolshevism, his spuit yearns for an answer 
that will allay the tunnoil of doubt aod uocertainty. And 
1t is just people of the lower social levels who follow the 
unconscious forces of the psyche ; it is the much-derided, 
stlent folk of the land-those who are less infected with 
academic preJudices than great celebrities are wont to be. 
All these people, looked at from above, present mostly a 
dreary or laughable comedy ; aud yet they are as im­
pressively simple as those Galileaos who were ouce called 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com244 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
blessed. Is it not touching to see the refuse of man's psyche 
gathered together ID compendia a foot thick 1 We find 
recorded in Anthtopophyle,,, with scrupulous care the 
merest babblings, the most absurd actions and the wildest 
fantasies, while men like Havelock Ellis and Freud have 
dealt with the like matters m serious treatises which have 
been accorded all scientrlic honours Their reading poblic 
is scattered over the breadth of the civilized, white world. 
How are we to explain tlus zeal, this almost fanatical worslnp 
of repellent things ' In this way · the repellent thmgs 
belong to the psyche, they are of the substance of the psyche 
and therefore as precious as fragments of manuscnpt salvaged 
from ancient ruins Even the secret and nmsome things of 
the inner hfe are valuable to modern man because they 
serve lus purpose. But what purpose ? 
Freod has prefixed to !us lnlerj,,elalwn of D,eams the 
citation : Fleckre n nequeo superos Acheronta movebo--" If I 
cannot bend the gods on lugh, I will at least set Acheron 111 
uproar ". But to what purpose ? 
The gods whom we are called to dethrone are the J.dohzed 
values of our conscious world It 1s well known that 1t was 
the love-scandals of the ancient deities which contributed 
most to thefr discredit ; and now history is repeating itself 
People are laying bare the dubious foundations of our 
belauded virtues and incomparable ideals, and are calhng 
out to us in triumph : " There are your man-made gods, 
mere snares and delusions tainted with human baseness-­
whiled sepulchres !nil of dead men's bones and of all un­
cleanness". We recognize a familiar strain, and the Gospel 
words, which we never could make our own, now come to 
life again. 
I am deeply convinced that these are not vague analogies, 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 245 
There are too many persons to whom Freudian psychology 
is dearer than the Gospels, and to whom the RUSSian Terror 
means more than civic vutue. And yet all these people are 
our brothers, and m each of us there 1S at least one voice 
which seconds them-for in the end there 1S a psychic We 
which embraces us all 
The unexpected result of this spintual change IS that an 
ugh.er face is put upon the world It becomes so ugly that 
no one can love 1t any longer-we cannot even love ounelves 
-and m the end there is nothing m the outer world to draw 
us away from the reahty of the We within. Here, no doubt, 
we have the true sigmficance of thts spuitual change. After 
all, what does Theosophy, with its doctnnes of k"""" and 
reinca.mat1.0I1, seek to teach except that tins world of 
appearance is but a temporary health-resort for the morally 
unperfected ' It depreciates the present-day world no less 
radically than does the modem outlook, but with the help 
of a different techmque ; 1t does not v1l1fy our world, but 
grants 1t only a relative meaning in that 1t promises other 
and lugher worlds The result IS in either case the 
same 
I grant that all these ideas are extremely " unacademic ", 
the truth being that they touch modem man on the side 
where he 1S least conscious. Is it agam a mere coincidence 
that modern thought has had to come to tenns with Einstein's 
relativity theory and with ideas about the structure of the 
atom which lead us away from detenmnism and visual 
representation ' Even physics volatilizes our material 
world. It is no wonder, then, in my opuuon, if the modem 
man falls back upon the reality of psychic life and expects 
from it that certainty which the world demes bim 
But spintually the Western world is in a precanous 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com246 TIIE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
situation----and the danger lS greater the more we blind 
ourselves to the merciless truth with illusions about our 
beauty of soul. The Occidental burns incense to lwnself, 
and his own countenance is veiled from bun in the smoke. 
But how do we stnke men of another colour ? What do 
China and India think of us ? What feelings do we arouse 
in the black man ? And what is the opinion of all those 
whom we deprive of their lands and extenmnate with rum 
and veoereal disease ? 
I have a Red Indian fnend who is the governor of a pueblo. 
When we were once speaking confi.dentlally about the white 
man, he said to me: "We don't understand the whites, 
they are always wantmg someth~ways restless­
always looking for sometlung. What is 1t ;i We don't 
know. We can't understand them. They have such sharp 
noses, such thm, cruel hps, such hnes m their faces. We 
think they are all crazy." 
My friend had recogmzed, without being able to name it, 
the Aryan bird of prey with his msatiable lust to lord 1t in 
every land-even those that concern bun not at all. And 
he had also noted that megalomania of ours which leads us 
to suppose, among other things, that Chnstwuty IS the only 
truth, and the wlute Christ the only Redeemer. Alter 
setting the whole East m turmoil with our SCleDCC and 
technology, and exacting tribute from it, we send our 
missionaries even to Chma. The stamping out of polygamy 
by the African missions has given rise to prostitution on 
such a scale that in Ugsnda alone twenty thousand pounds 
sterling is spent yearly on preventatives of venereal infection, 
not to speak of the moral consequences, which have been of 
the worst. And the good European pays his misaionaries 
for these edifying achievements I No need to mention also 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 247 
the story of suffering in PolyneS18. and the b1.essmgs of the 
opium trade. 
That 1S how the European looks when he is extricated 
from the cloud of his own moral mcense No wonder that 
to unearth buried fragments of psychic We we have first to 
dram a IDlasmal swamp. Only a great idealist hke Freud 
could devote a hfetime to the unclean work This 1S the 
begmning of our psychology. For us acquaintance with the 
realities of psycluc life could start only at this end, with all 
that repels us and that we do not wish to see. 
But lf the psyche CODS1Sted for us only of evtl and worthless 
t:Jungs, no power m the world could induce a nonnal man to 
pretend to find 1t attractive. This JS why people who see m 
Theosophy nothing but regrettable mtellectual superficiality, 
and in Freucban psychology nothing but sensa.tionabsm, 
prophesy an early and mglorious end for these movements. 
They overlook the fact that they derive their force from the 
fascmatlon of psychic hfe No doubt the passionate mterest 
that is aroused by them may find other expressions; but 1t 
will certamly show itself m these forms untJI they are replaced 
by sometlung better. Superstition and perversity are after 
all one and the same. They are transitional or embryonic 
stages from which new and nper forms will emerge. 
Whether from the mtellectual, the moral or the asth.etJ.c 
v,ewpoint, the undercurrents of the psychic We of the West 
present an uninviting picture We have built a monumental 
world round about us, and have slaved for it with unequalled 
energy. But it is so imposing only because we have spent 
upon the outside all that is imposmg in our natures-and 
what we find when we look within must necessarily be as 
11 is, shabby and insufficient. 
I am aware that in saymg this I somewhat anticipate the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com248 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
actual growth of consciousness. There is as yet no general 
irunght into these facts of psychic hfe. Westerners are only 
on the way to a recognition of these facts. and for quite 
undentandable reasons they struggle violently against it. 
Of course Spengler's pessimism has exerted some influence, 
but this has been safely confined to academic circles. As 
for psychological insight, ,t always trespasses upon penonal 
hfe, and therefore meets with personal reSIStances and 
denials I am far from considering these remtances meaning­
less ; on the contrary I see in them a healthy reactton to 
sometlnng which threatens destruction Whenever relativism 
is taken as a fundamental and final pnnaple it has a 
destructive effect When, therefore, I call attentwn to the 
dismal undercurrents of the psyche, 1t is not in order to sound 
a pessirrustic note ; I wish rather to emphasize the fact that 
the uncOllSClOus has a strong attraction not only for the sick, 
but far healthy, constructive minds as well-and thIS in 
spite of its alamung aspect. The psyclnc depths are nature, 
and nature is creative hfe. It lS true that nature tears down 
what she has herself bwlt up-yet she builds it once again. 
Whatever values m the VJSible world are destroyed by 
modern relativism, the psyche will produce their eqmvalents. 
At fust we cannot see beyond the path that leads downward 
to dark and hateful things-but no hght or beauty will 
ever come from the man who cannot bear this sight. Light 
is always born of darkness, and the sun never yet stood still 
in heaven to satisfy man's longing or to sb.ll lus fears. Does 
not the example of Anquetil du Perron show us how psychic 
life survives its own eclipse 1 China hardly behoves that 
European science and technology are preparing her ruin. 
Why should we believe that we must be destroyed by the 
secret, spiritual influence of the East 1 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 249 
But I forget that we do not yet realize that while we are 
turning upside down the matenal world of the East with our 
techrucal proficiency, the East with its psychic proficiency 
IS throwing our spmtual world into confuston We have 
never yet lut upon the thought that wlule we are overpower­
ing the Onent from without, it may be fasterung its hold 
upon us from withm Such an idea strikes us as almost 
insane, because we have eyes only for gross matenal connec­
twns, and fatl to see that we must lay the blame for the 
intellectual conf11S10n of our middle class at the doors of 
Max Muller, Oldenberg, Neumann, Deussen, Wilhelm and 
others hke them What does the example of the Roman 
Empire teach us' After the conquest of ASJ.a Minor, Rome 
became Asta.tic , even Europe was mfected by Asia, and 
remains so today Out of Cthcia came the Mithraic cult­
the rehgwn of the Roman army-and 1t spread from Egypt 
to fog-bound Bntam Need I pomt to the Asia.he ongm of 
Chnstiaruty ' 
We have not yet clearly grasped the fact that Western 
Theosophy is an amateunsh 11D1tahon of the East We are 
Just takmg up astrology again, and that to the Orumtal is 
his dally bread. Our studies of sexual hfe, ongmating in 
Vienna and m England, are matched or surpassed by Hindu 
teachmgs on tlus sub1ect. Onental texts ten centuries old 
mtroduce us to pb1losoph1cal relativism, while the idea of 
indetermmation, newly broached m the West, furnishes the 
very basis of Chinese science. Richard Wilhelm has even 
shown me that certain comphcated processes discovered by 
analytical psychology are recogmzably descnbed in ancient 
Chinese texts. Psychoanalysis itself and the lines of 
thought to which 1t gives rise-----surely a disbnctly Western 
development-are only a begumer's attempt compared to 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com,50 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
what is an immemorial art in the East. It should be 
mentioned that the parallels between psychoanal)'SIS and 
yoga have already been traced by Dakar A, H. Schmitz. 
The Theosophists have an amusing idea that certain 
Mahatmas, seated somewhere in the Himalayas or Tibet, 
inspire or direct every mind in the world. So strong, m fact, 
can be the influence of the Eastern belief in magic upon 
Europeans of a sound mind, that some of them have assured 
me that I am unw,ttingly mspired by the Mahatmas with 
every good thing I say, my own inspirations being of no 
account whatever This myth of the Mahatmas, widely 
circulated and firmly believed 111 the West, far from being 
nonsense, is--hke every myth-illl important psychological 
truth. It seems to be qmte true that the East ,sat the bottom 
of the spiritual change we are passmg through today. Ooly 
this East is not a Tibetan monastery full of Mahatmas, but 
ma sense lies withm us. It is from the depths of our own 
psychic life that new spiritual forms will anse , they will 
be expressions of psychic forces which may help to subdue 
the boundless lust for prey of Aryan man. We shall perhaps 
come to know something of that circumscription of life wluch 
has grown in the East into a dubious quietism ; also some­
thmg of that stability which human existence a.cqwres when 
theclaimsofthe spirit become as imperative as the necessities 
of social Ide. Yet in this age of Americanization we are 
still far from anything of the sort, and it seems to me that 
we are only at the threshold of a new spiritual epoch. I 
do not wish to pass myself of! as a prophet, but I cannot 
outline the spiritual problem of modern man without givmg 
emphasis to the yearning for rest that arises in a penod of 
unrest, or to the longing for security that is bred of in­
security. It is from need and distress that new forms of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 251 
bfe take their rise, and not from mere wishes or from the 
reqwrements of our ideals. 
To me, the crux of the sp,ritual problem of today is to be 
found in the fascma.bon which psychic hfe exerts upon 
modem man. If we are pessunists, we shall call it a sign of 
decadence ; if we are optinustically mchned. we shall see 
in it the promise of a far-reaching spmtual change in the 
Western world. At all events, it is a stgnifi.cant mamfesta­
tion. It is the more noteworthy because it shows itself in 
broad sections of every people ; and 1t is the more important 
because it is a matter of those unponderable psycluc forces 
which transform human hfe m ways that are unforeseen and 
-as history shows----unforeseeable These are the forces, 
still mVISible to many persons today, which are at the bottom 
of the present " psychological " mterest. When the attrac­
tive power of psychic We 1S so strong that man is neither 
repelled nor dismayed by what he is sure to find, then it has 
nothing of sicldmess or pervemon about it. 
Along the great lughroads of the world everything seems 
desolate and outworn Instmctlvely the modem man leaves 
the trodden ways to explore the by-paths and lanes, Just as 
the man of the Gneco-Roman world cast off his defunct 
Olymp,an gods and turned to the mystery-cults of Asia. 
The force w1thm us that unpels us to the search, turning 
outward, annexes Eastern Theosophy and magic ; but it 
also turns inward and leads us to give our thoughtful atten­
tion to the unconscious psyche. It inspires in us the self­
same scepticism and relentlessness with which a Buddha 
swept aside !us two oulhon gods that he might come to the 
pristine experience which alone is convincing. 
And now we must ask a final question. Is what I have said 
of the modem man really true, or is it perhaps the result of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com252 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
an optical illusion ? There can be no doubt whatever that 
the facts I have cited are wholly urelevant contingencies m 
the eyes of many mllhons of Westerners, and seem only 
regrettable errors to a large number of educated persons. 
But I may ask . What dul a cultivated Roman thlnk of 
Christianity when he saw it spreading among the people of 
the lowest classes ? The biblical God is still a hvmg person 
in the Western world-as hvmg as Allah beyond the 
Mediterranean. One kind of behever holds the other an 
ignoble heretic, to be pitied and tolerated if he cannot be 
changed What is more, a clever European is convinced 
that rebgion and such tlungs are good enough for the masses 
and for women, but are of httle weight compared to 
econonnc and pohtical affairs 
So I am refuted all along the hne, hke a man who predicts 
a thunderstorm. when there is not a cloud 1n the sky Perhaps 
1t IS a storm beneath the horizon that he senses-and 1t may 
never reach us But what is sigm.ficant in psychic bfe 1s 
always below the horizon of consciousness, and when we 
speak of the spintual problem of modem man we are dealing 
with t1ungs that are barely visible-with the most mtunate 
and fragile thinp---with flowers that open only in the night 
Jn daylight everytlung is clear and tangible ; but the night 
lasts as long as the day, and we live m the mght-time also. 
There are persons who have bad dreams wluch even spoil 
their days for them. And the day's life is for many people 
such a bad dream that they long for the night when the 
spirit awakes. I even believe that there are nowadays a 
great many such people, and this is why I maintain that the 
spiritual problem of modern man is much as I have presented 
it. I must plead guilty, indeed, to the charge of ooe-sided• 
°"""• for I have not mentioned the modem spirit of commit-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 253 
ment to a practical world about which everyone has much to 
say because it lies in such full view We find 1t in the ideal 
of internationahsm or supemationalism wluch 1S embodied 
m the League of Nations and the hke, and we find it also 
in sport and, very expressively, in the cinema and in jazz 
ffiUSIC 
These are certamly characteristic symptoms of our time , 
they show unnustakably how the ideal of humanism is made 
to embrace the body also Sport represents an exceptional 
valuation of the human body, as does also modern dancing 
The cinema, on the other band, hke the detective story, 
makes 1t possible to experience without danger all the 
excitement, pass10n and desirousness which must be re­
pressed in a humanitanan ordenng of hfe It is not difficult 
to see how these symptoms are connected with the psychic 
situation. The attractive power of the psyche brings about 
a new self-estimation-a re-estimation of the basic facts of 
human nature We can hardly be surpnsed if this leads to 
the rediscovery of the body after its long depreciation in the 
name of the spmt We are even tempted to speak of the 
body's revenge upon the spirit. When Keyserbng sarcasti­
cally singles out the chauffeur as the culture-hero of our time, 
he has struck, as he often does, close to the mark. The 
body lays cla.J.m to equal recogmtlon; like the psyche, 1t 
also exerts a fascmation If we are still caught by the old 
idea of an antithesis between llllnd and matter, the present 
state of a.flaus means an unbearable contradiction ; 1t may 
even divide us against ourselves But if we can reconcile 
ourselves with the mysterious truth that spirit is the livmg 
body seen from within, and the body the outer manifestatwn 
of the living spmt-the two bemg really one-then we can 
understand why 1t is that the attempt to transcend the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com254 THE SPIRITUAL PROBLEM OF MODERN MAN 
present level of consciousness must give its due to the body. 
We shall also see that belief in the body cannot tolerate an 
outlook that denies the body in the name of the spirit. These 
claims of physical and psyclnc hie are so pressing compared 
to similar claims in the past, that we may be tempted to see 
in this a sign of decadence Yet it may also signify a 
rejuvenation, for as H<llderlin says : 
Danger itself 
Fosters the rescuing power.1 
What we actually see is that the Western world stnkes up 
a still more rapid tempo-the American tempo-the ve,y 
opposite of quietism and resigned aloofness An enormous 
teosion arises between the opposite poles of outer and inner 
hie, between obJective and subiective reahty. Perhaps it JS 
a final race between ageing Europe and young America • 
perhaps it is a desperate or a wholesome effort of conscious 
man to cheat the laws of nature of their hidden nught and 
to wrest a yet greater, more heroic victory from the sleep of 
the nations. This is a question which hJStory will answer. 
In commg to a close after so many bold assertions, I 
would hke to return to the prmmse made at the outset to 
be mindful of the need for moderatwn and cautum Indeed, 
I do not forget that my voice is but one voice, my experience 
a mere drop in the sea, my knowledge no greater than the 
visual field in a :rrucroscope, my mind's eye a mirror that 
reflects a small comer of the world, and my ideas-a 
subjective confession. 
a WoG•ffUWut, 
wu.1,, m Rdllnda •utl. (H6lderlm) 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comXI 
PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
IT 1S the urgent psychic problems of patients, much more 
than the questions put by scientific workers, which have 
given effective impetus to the newer developments m nierhcal 
psychology and psychotherapy The science of medicine 
has avoided all contact with strictly psychic problems. It 
has held to tins position m spite of the patient's urgent needs, 
but on the partly Justified assumption that psyclnc problems 
belong to other fields of study. And yet 1t has been forced 
to widen its scope so as to mclude experimental psychology, 
Just as it has been driven time and tune again-in view of 
man's biological homogeneity-to borrow from such branches 
of science as chemistry, physics and biology. 
It was natural that a new direction should be given to 
these adopted branches of science We can characterize 
the change by saying that instead of being regarded as ends 
m themselves, they were valued because of their possible 
application to human beings Psychiatry, for example, 
helped itself out of the treasure-chest of experimental 
psychology and funded its borrowings in that inclusive body 
of knowledge called psychopathology-a general name for 
the study of complex psychic mELDi:festations. Psycho­
pathology is built for one part upon the findings of psycluat,y 
in the strict sense of the term, and for the other upon the 
findings of neurology-a field of study which originally 
•ss 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com•s6 PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
embraced the so-called psychogenetic neuroses, and sbll 
does so in academic parlance. In practice, however, a gulf 
has opened in the last few decades between the trained 
neurologmt and the psychotherapist, tlus nft bemg traceable 
to the first researches in hypnobsm There was no prevenbng 
th1S divergence, for neurology is the study of organic nervous 
diseases in particular, while the psychogenetic neuroses are 
not organic diseases m the usual sense of the term Nor do 
these neuroses fall within the realm of psychiatry, whose 
particular field of study JS the psychoses, or mental diseases 
-for the psychogenetJ.c neuroses are not mental dtseases 
as this tenn 1S commonly understood Rather do they 
constitute a specml field by themselves which has 
no hard and fast boundanes, and they show many 
transitional forms which point in two dircchons towards 
mental disease on the one hand, and disease of the nerves 
on the other. 
The unmistakable featme of the neuroses 1S the fact that 
their causes are psycluc, and that their cure depends entirely 
upon psychic methods of treatment The attempts to 
delimit and to explore tbis special field-both from the 
side of psychtatry and from that of neurology-have led to 
a discovery which is very unwelcome to the science of mech­
cine · namely, the discovery that the psyche is an a:b.o­
Iogical or causal factor in disease. In the course of the 
nineteenth century medicine shaped its methods and theory 
m such a way as to become one of the disciplines of natural 
science, and it also adopted that primary assumption of 
natural science : material causation. For medicine the psyche 
did not exist in its own right, and expenmental psychology 
also did its best to constitute itself a psychology without 
the psyche. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 257 
Investigation, however, has established beyond a doubt 
that the crux of the psycho-neuroses is to be found m the 
psychic factor ; that this is the essential cause of the patho-­
logical state, and must therefore be recognized m its own 
right along with other admitted pathogeruc factors such as 
inhentance, dispos1tion, bactenal infectJ.on, and so forth. 
All attempts to explain the psychic factor in terms of more 
elementary physical factors were doomed to failure There 
was more promise in the attempt to delimit the psycluc 
factor by the concept of the dnve or instinct 1-a 
concept taken over from biology. It is well known that 
instincts are observable physiological urges winch are 
traceable to the functioning of the glands, and that, as 
expenence shows, they condJ.bon or Influence psychic 
processes What could seem more plausible, therefore, than 
to seek the specific cause of the psycho-neuroses, not in the 
mystical notion of the " soul ", but in a disturbance of the 
impulses which might possibly be curable in the last resort 
by mechcmal treatment of the glands ? As a matter of 
fact, this is Freud's standpoint when estabhshing his well­
known theory which explains the neuroses m terms of 
disturbances of the sexual impulse. Adler likewise resorts 
to the concept of the drive, and explains the neuroses 
in terms of disturbances of the urge to power We must 
admit, indeed, that thlS concept is further removed from 
physiology, and is of a more psyclnc nature, than that of 
the sexual drive. 
The concept of instinct is anything but well defined in the 
scientific sense. It apphes to a biological manifestation of 
great complexity, and is not much more than a notion of 
quite indefirute content standing for an unknown quantity. 
1 The German 1ltWd Trub coven both. (Traaa ) 
R 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com258 PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
I do not wish to enter here upon a cnti.cal discussion of the 
concept of instinct. Instead I will consider the possibility 
that the psychic factor is just a combmation of instincts 
which for their part may again be reduced to the functioning 
of the glands. We may even chscuss the possibility that 
everytlung that is usually called psychic is embraced. in the 
sum•total of instincts, and that the psyche itself is therefore 
only an instmct or a conglomerate of msbncts, bemg in the 
last analysis nothing but the functlomng of the glands A 
psycho-neuroSIS would thus be a glandular chsease. Tins 
statement, however, has not been proved, and no glandular 
extract that will cure a neur0S1S has as yet been found On 
the other hand, we have been taught by all too many 
m1Stakes that orgaruc med.Jcme fails completely in the 
treatment of neuroses, while psyclnc methods cure them. 
These psychic methods are just as effecbve as we might 
suppose the glandular extracts would be So far, then, as 
our present experience goes, neuroses are to be mfluenced 
or cured by COI1SJ.d.enng them, not from the Side of their 
irreductble elements, the glandular secretions, but from that 
of psyclnc activity, which must be taken as a reahty. For 
example, a suitable explana"b.on or a comforting word to the 
patient may have something like a heahng effect which may 
even influence the glandular secrebons The doctor's words, 
to be sure, are " only " vibrations in the air, yet they con­
stitute a particular set of vibrations correspondmg to a 
particular psychic state in the doctor. The words are 
e.iective only in so far as they convey a mezning or have 
si&nfficance. It is their meaning which is effective. But 
"mezning " is something mental or spiritual. Call it a 
fiction if you like. None the Jess it enables us to influence 
the course of the disease in a far more effective way than . 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 259 
with chemJ.cal preparations We can even influence the 
biochemical processes of the body by 1t. Whether the 
fiction arises in me spontaneously. or reaches me from 
without by way of human speech, it can make me ill or cure 
me. Nothing is surely more intangible and unreal than 
fictions, tlluSions and opinions ; and yet nothmg is more 
effective in the psychic and even the psychophysical realm. 
It was by recognizmg these facts that science discovered 
the psyche, and we are now in honour bound to admit its 
reahty. It has been shown that the drive, or instinct, is a 
condition of psycluc activity, whtle at the same time 
the psychic processes seem to condition the mstincts. 
It is no reproach to the Freudian and Adlenan theones 
that they are based upon the dnves ; the only trouble IS 
that they are une-Slded The kmd of psychology they 
represent leaves out the psyche, and is suited to people who 
beheve that they have no spuitual needs or aspirations In 
tins matter both the doctor and the patient deceive them­
selves Although the theones of Freud and Adler come much 
nearer to getting at the bottom of the neuroses than does 
any earher approach to the question from the side of medi.cme, 
they still fail, because· of their exclusive concern with the 
drives, to satISfy the deeper spintual needs of the patient 
They are still bound by the premises of nineteenth-century 
SCJence, and they are too seli-evuient-they give too httle 
value to fictional and nnagma:bve processes In a word, they 
do not give meanmg enough to life. And it is only the 
meamnglul that sets us free. 
Everyday reasonableness, sound human judgement, and 
science as a compendium of common sense, certainly help 
us over a good part of the road ; yet they do not go beyond 
that frontier of human life which surrounds the communplace 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com26o PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
and matter-of-fact, the merely average and normal. They 
afford, after all, no answer to the question of spmtual 
suffering and its mnermost meaning A psycho-neurosis 
must be und.eistood as the suffering of a human being who 
has not iliscovered what hfe means for him But all creative­
ness in the realm of the spirit as well as every psychic advance 
of man anses from a state of mental suffering, and 1t is 
spui.tual stagnation, psychic sterility, which causes this state. 
The doctor who re2hzes this truth sees a territory opened 
before him winch he approaches with the greatest hesitation. 
He is now confronted with the necessity of conveying to his 
patJ.ent the hea.lmg fiction, the meaning that qmckens---for 
it is tlus that the patient longs for, over and above all that 
reason and science can give bun. The pa.bent is lookmg for 
something that will take possession of him and g:1ve meaning 
and form to the confusion of 1us neurohc nnnd. 
Is the doctor equal to tlus task ? To begm with, he will 
probably hand over his patient to the clergyman or the 
philosopher, or abandon him to that perplexity winch is the 
special note of our day. As a doctor he IS not reqwred to have 
a firushed outlook on hfe, and his professional conscience 
does not demand it of him. But what will he do when he 
sees only too clearly why !us patient is ill ; when he sees 
that it arises from his haVlllg no love, but only sexuality ; 
no faith, because he is afraid to grope in the dark , no hope, 
because he is disillusioned by the world and by life ; and 
no understanding, because he has failed to read the meaning 
of his own existence ? 
There are many well-<Oducated patients who flatly refuse 
to consult the clergyman. With the philosopher they will 
have even less to do, for the lustory of philosophy leaves 
them cold, and intellectual problems seem to them more 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY z6I 
barren than the desert And where are the great and wise 
men who do not merely talk about the meamng of hfe and 
of the world, but really possess 1t > Human thought cannot 
conceive any system or final truth that could give the patient 
wha.t he needs m order to live : that is, faith, hope, love and 
insight. 
These four highest achievements of human effort are so 
many gifts of grace, w1uch are neither to be taught nor 
learned, neither given nor taken, neither withheld nor earned, 
since they come through expeneru:e, wluch is somethmg 
gtl/ffl, and therefore beyond the reach of human caprice 
Expenences cannot be made. They happen-yet fortunately 
their independence of man's activity is not absolute but 
relative. We can draw closer to them-that much bes 
within our human reach. There are ways wluch bring us 
neaIOI to hving experience, yet we should beware of calhng 
these ways " methods ". The very word has a deademng 
effect The way to expenence, moreover, is anytlu.ng but a 
clever trick ; it is rather a venture wlnch requires us to 
commit ourselves with OUI whole being. 
Thus, m trying to meet the demands made upon him, 
the doctor is confronted by a questwn which seems to 
contain an insuperable difficulty How can he help the 
sufferer to attain the liberating experience which will bestow 
upon him the IOUI great gilts of grace and heal his sickness 1 
We can of course adVlSe the patient with the very best 
mtentions that he should have true love, or true faith, or 
true hope , and we can admODlsh him with the phrase : 
" Know thyself ". But how is the patient, before he has 
come to experience, to obtain that wluch only experience 
can give him ? 
Saul owed his conversion neither to true love, nor to true 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com262 PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
faith, nor to any other truth. It was solely !us hatred of 
the Chnstiaas that set him upon the road to Damascus, 
and to that decisive experience whicll was to decide the 
whole COUI>e of his hie. He was brought to this experience 
by following with conviction the course in wluch he was 
moot completely mistaken. This opens up for us an 
approach to the problems of life which we can hardly take 
too eeriously. And it confronts the psychotherapist with 
a question whicll brings 1nm shoulder to shoulder with the 
cle,gyman : the question of good and evil 
It is in reahty the priest or the clergyman, rather than the 
doctor, who should be most concerned with the problem of 
spiritual suffering. But in most cases the sufferer consults 
the doctor in the first place, because he supposes lumself 
to be physically ill, and because certain neurouc symptoms 
can be at least alleviated by drugs. But 11, on the other hand, 
the clergyman is consulted, he cannot persuade the sick man 
that the trouble is psycluc As a rule be lacks the special 
knowledge which would enable him to cbscem the psycluc 
factors of the disease, and his Judgement is without the 
weight of authonty. 
There are, however, persons who, while well aware of the 
psychic nature of their complaint, nevertheless refuse to 
turn to the clergyman They do not believe that he can 
really help them Such persons distrust the doctor for the 
same reason, and they are J-fied by the fact that both 
doctor and clergyman stand before them with empty hands, 
d not-what is even ~with empty words We can 
hardly expect the doctor to have anythmg to say about the 
u!tunate questions of the soul. It is from the clergyman, 
not from the doctor, that the sufferer should expect such 
help. But the Protestant clergyman often finds himself 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY z63 
face to face with an almost impossible task, for he has to 
cope with practu:al duliculties that the Cathohc priest is 
spared Above all, the priest has the authority of his 
Church behmd bun, and his econOJWc position is secure and 
independent This is far less true of the Protestant clergy­
man who may be manied and burdened with the respon­
sibility of a family, and cannot expect, if all else fails, to be 
supported by lus commwuty or taken mto a monastery. 
But the pnest, rl he 1s also a Jesuit, even has at his chsposal 
the psychological teaching of the preseot day. I know, for 
instance, that my own writmgs were senously studied m 
Rome long before any Protestant pastor thought them 
worthy of a glance 
We have come to a serious pass. The exodus from the 
Gennao Protestant Chorch JS only one of many symptoms 
wlu.ch should make it plam to the clergy that mere admoni­
tions to beheve, or to perfonn acts of charity, do not give 
modem man what he IS lookmg for. The fact that many 
clergymeo seek support or practical help from Freud's 
theory of sexuahty or Adler's theory of power is astonishing, 
inasmuch as both these theones are hosttle to spiritual 
values, being, as I have said, psychology without the psyche. 
They are rational methods of treatmeot which actually 
hioder the reahzauon of meanmgful expenence. By far the 
larger number of psychotherapists are chsctples of Freud or 
of Adler This means that the great ma1onty of patients 
are necessanly alienated from a spmtual standpomt-a fact 
which cannot be a matter of mdifference to one who has the 
reahzation of spiritual values much at heart. The wave of 
interest in psychology which at present is sweeping over 
the Protestant countries of Europe 1S far from receding. It 
is cnincident with the general exodus from the Chorch. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com26.j PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
Quoting a Protestant minister, I may say : " Nowadays 
people go to the psychotheraplSt rather than to the 
clergyman." 
I am convinced that this statement is true only of relatively 
educated persons, not of mankind in the mass. However, 
we must not forget that it will be some twenty years before 
the ordinary run of people begin to think the thoughts of 
the educated person of today. For instance, Bilchner's 
work, Fo,ce and Mdn, became one of the most widely 
read bocks in German public libraries about twenty years 
after educated persons had begun to forget about it. I am 
persuaded that what is today a vital interest in psychology 
among educated persons will tomormw be shared by 
everyone. 
I should hl<e to call attention to the following facts. 
During the past thirty years, people from all the avilized 
countnes of the earth have consulted me I have treated 
many hundreds of patients, the huger number being 
Protestants, a smaller number Jews, and not more than five 
or six beheving Cathohcs. Among all my patients in the 
second half of lif&-that is to say, over thirty-five-there 
has not been one whose problem in the last resort was not 
that of finchng a rehgious outlook on life. It is safe to say 
that every one of them fell ill because he had lost that winch 
the living religions of every age have given to their followers, 
and none of them has been really healed who did not 
regain his rehgious outlook This of course has nothing 
whatever to do with a particular creed or membership of a 
church. 
Here, then, the clergyman stands before a vast horizon. 
But it would seem as if no one had noticed it. It also looks 
as though the Protestant clergyman of today was in-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 265 
sufficiently equipped to cope with the urgent psychic needs 
of our age It is indeed high tune for the clergyman and 
the psychotherapist to jom forces to meet this great spiritual 
task. 
Here is a concrete example which goes to show how 
closely this problem touches us all Somewhat more than 
two years ago the leaders of the Christian Students' 
Conference at Aarau (Switzerland) laid before me the question 
whether people jn spmtual distress prefer nowadays to 
consult the doctor rather than the clergyman, and what are 
the causes of their choke. This was a very direct and 
concrete question. At that time I knew nothmg more 
than the fact that my own pahents obviously had con­
sulted the doctor rather than the clergyman. It seemed 
to me to be open to doubt whether this was generally the 
case or not. At any rate, I was unable to give a definite 
reply. I therefore set on foot ao enqwry, through acquain­
tances of mine, among people whom I dul not know , I 
sent out a questionnaire which was answered by Swiss~ 
German, and French Protestants, as well as by a few 
Catholics. The results are very interesting, as the following 
general summary shows. Those who decided for the doctor 
represented 57 per cent. of the Protestants and only 25 per 
cent of the Cathohcs, while those who decided for the 
divine formed 8 per cent of the Protestants and 58 per cent. 
of the Catholics. These were the unequivocal decisions. 
There were some 35 per cent. of the Protestants who could 
not make up their mmds, while only 17 per cent of the 
Catholics were undecided. 
The reason given for not consulting the minister of the 
church was generally his lack of psychological knowledge 
and insight, and this covered 52 per cent. of the aoswers. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com266 PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
Some 28 per cent. were to the effect that he was prejudiced 
in his views and showed a dogma.UC and traditional bias. 
Curiously enough, there was even one clergyman who 
deClded for the doctor, while another made the irritated 
retort : " Theology has nothing to do with the treatment of 
human beings ". All the relatives of clergymen who 
answered my questionnaire pronounced themselves against 
the clergy. 
In so far as tlus enquiry was restricted to educated persons. 
it IS only a straw in the wind I am convinced that the 
uneducated classes would have reacted differently But I am 
inclined to accept the results as a more or less valid indication 
of the views of educated people, the more so as it is a well­
known fact that their indifference in matters of the Church 
and religion is stea.dtly growmg. And we must not forget 
that truth of soc,al psychology to whiclt I have already 
referred : that it takes about twenty years for a general 
outlook upon We to percolate down from the educated class 
to the uneducated masses. Who, for mstance, would have 
dared to prophesy twenty years ago, or even ten, that Spain, 
the most Catholic of European countries, would undergo the 
unexampled spui.tual transformation we are witnessing 
today ' And yet 1t has broken out with the violence of a 
cataclysm 
It seems to me, that, side by side with the decline of 
religious life, the neuroses grow noticeably more frequent. 
There are as yet no statistics which enable us to prove t1us 
increase in actual numbers. But of one thing I am sure, 
that everywhere the mental state of European man shows 
an alarming lack of balance. We are living undeniably in 
a period of the greatest restlessness, nervous tension, 
confusion and disorientation of outlook. Amm:ig my patients 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTIIERAP!STS OR TIIE CLERGY 267 
from many countries, all of them educated persons, there 
lS a COllSlderable number who came to see me, not because 
they were suffenng from a neurosis, but because they could 
find no meamng 1Il hfe or were tortunng themselves with 
questions wluch neither present-day phtlosophy nor religion 
could answer. Some of them perhaps thought that I knew 
of a magic formula, but I was soon forced to tell them that 
I, too, had no answer to give. And tlns bnngs us to practical 
considerations 
Let us take for example that most ordmary and frequent 
of questions What is the meaning of my We, or of hfe in 
general ;, Men to-day beheve that they know only too well 
what the clergyman will say----or, rather, must say-to this. 
They smtle at the very thought of the philosopher's answer, 
and in general do not expect much of the physician But 
from the psychotherapist who analyses the unconscious­
from him one might doubtless learn somethmg He has 
perhaps dug up from the depths of hts mind, among other 
thmgs, a meanmg for hfe wluch could be bought for a fee I 
It must be a rehef to every serious-minded person to hear 
that the psychotherapist also does not know what to say. 
Such a confession is often the beginning of the patient's 
confidence m him 
I have found that modern man has an ineradicable avemon 
for traditional opimons and mhented truths. He is a 
Bolshevist for whom all the spintual standards and forms 
of the past have lost their validity, and who therefore wants 
to expenment in the world of the spint as the Bolshevist 
expenments with econODllCS When confronted with this 
modern attitude, every ecclesiastical system 1S in a parlous 
state, be it Catholic, Protestant, Buddlust or Confucian. 
Among these modems there are of course certain of those 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com268 PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
denigrahng, destructive and pervene natures-unbalanced 
eccentrics-who are never satisfied anywhere, and who 
therefore flock to every new banner, much to the hurt of 
these movements and undertakings, in the hope of finding 
something /or o,sce which will atone at a low cost for their 
own insufficiency. It goes without saying that, in my 
professional work, I have come to know a great many 
modem men and women, and such pathological pseudo­
modems among them. But I prefer to leave these asule. 
Those of whom I am thinking are by no means s,cldy 
eccentrics, but are most often exceptionally able, courageous 
and upnght persons who have repudiated our trad1twnal 
truths for honest and decent reasons, and not from wicked­
ness of heart. Every one of them has the feehng that our 
rehglous truths have somehow or other grown empty. 
Either they cannot reconcile the scienh.fic and the rehgious 
outlooks, or Cbrisban tenets have lost the1r authority and 
their psychological justuicallon People no longer feel 
themselves to have been redeemed by the death of Christ , 
they canoot behev&-they cannot compel themselves to 
believe, however happy they may deem the man who has a 
belief. Sin has for them become something quite relative . 
what is evil for the one, is good for the other. After all, 
why should not Buddha be in the right, also ' 
There JS no one who is not familiar with these questions 
and doubts. Yet Freudian analysis would brush all these 
matters aside as u:relevant. It holds the position that the 
basic problem is that of repressed sexuality, and that philo­
sophical or religious doubts only mask the true state of 
affairs. If we closely examine the individual case, we do 
actually discover peculiar disturbances in the sexual sphere 
as well as in the sphere of the unconscious impulses in general 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 269 
It is Freud's way to see in these disturbances an explanation 
of the psychic disturbance as a whole ; be is interested only 
in the causal interpretation of the sexual symptoms. He 
completely overlooks the fact that, m certain cases, the 
supposed causes of the neurOSIS were al.ways present, but 
had no pathological effect untsl a disturbance of the conscious 
attitude set m and led to a neurotic upset. It is as though. 
when a slnp was smking because of a leak, the crew only 
interested itself in the chemical constitution of the water 
that was pouring m Disturbances in the sphere of the 
unconscious drives are not primary, but secondary pheno­
mena When conscious life has lost its meaning and promise, 
1t IS as though a pamc had broken loose and we heard the 
exclamation " Let us eat and dnnk, for tomorrow we che I ,. 
It is tlus mood, born of the meaninglessness of hfe, that 
causes the disturbance in the unconscious and provokes the 
painfully curbed 1mpulses to break out anew. The causes of 
a neurosis lie m the present as well as in the past ; and only 
a still existmg ea.use can keep a neurosis acb.ve. A man IS 
not tubercular because he was infected twenty years ago 
with ba.ctlh, but because foci of mfection are still active tcxlay. 
The questwns when and how the infectwn took place are even 
quite irrelevant to his present condition. Even the most 
accurate knowledge of the previous history of the case cannot 
cure tuberculOSlS. And the same holds true of the neuroses. 
This JS why I regard the rebgious problems wluch the 
patient brings before me as relevant to the neurosis and as 
possible causes of ,t. But 1! I take them seriously, I must 
admit to the patient that his feelmgs are justified " Yes, 
I agree, Buddha may be right as well as Jesus. Sm is only 
relative, and 1t is difficult to see how we can feel ourselves 
in any way redeemed by the death of Christ." As • doctor 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com270 PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
I can easily admit these doubts, wlule it is hard for the 
clergyman to do so The patient feels my attitude to be 
one of understanding, while the pastor's hesitation strikes 
him as a traditional prejudice, which estranges them from 
one another. He asks himseli. "What would the pastor 
say if I began to tell him of the pamful details of my sexual 
disturbances ? " He rightly suspects that the pastor's 
moral preJudice is even stronger than Ins dogmatic bias. 
In tins connect10n there JS a good story about the Amencan 
president, " silent Cal " Coolidge When he returned after 
an absence one Sunday morning his wife asked him where 
he had been. "To church", he replied "What did the 
IDllllSter say 1" "He talked about sin." "And what chd 
he say about sm ? " " He was against 1t " 
It might be supposed that 1t 1S easy for the doctor to show 
understamhng m tlns respect. But people forget that even 
doctors have moral scruples, and that certain patients' 
confessions are hard even for a doctor to swallow. Yet the 
patient does not feel hllllself accepted unless the very worst 
in him 1s accepted too No one can bring this about by mere 
words , it comes only through the doctor's smcerity and 
through h1S attitude towards lumself and his own evtl side 
If the doctor wants to offer gwdance to another, or even to 
accompany hun a step of the way, he must be in touch with 
this other person's psycluc hfe He is never in touch when he 
passes Judgement. Whether he puts lus Judgements mto 
words, or keeps them to lumseU, makes not the shghtest 
difference. To take the opposite position, a.nd to agree with 
the patient offhand, is also of no use, but estranges him as 
much as condemnation. We can get m touch with another 
person only hy an attitude of unprejudleed obJeetivity. This 
may&OUDd like a scientific precept, and may be confused with 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY z7I 
a purely intellectual and detached attitude of mind. But 
what I mean to convey IS something qmte drllerent. It IS a 
human quahty-a kmd of deep respect for facts and events 
and for the person who suffers from them-a respect for the 
secret of such a human hfe. The truly rehgious person has 
this attitude He knows that God has brought all sorts of 
strange and inconceivable things to pass. and seeks in the 
most cunous ways to enter a man's heart He therefore 
senses in everything the unseen presence of the divme will 
Tins 1s what I mean by " unpreJudtced obJechvitv." It JS 
a moral achievement on the part of the doctor, who ought 
not to let h:Jmsell be repelled by illness and cormption. We 
cannot change anything unless we accept 1t. Condemnation 
does not hberate, 1t oppresses. I am the oppressor of the 
person I condemn, not Ins fnend and fellow-sufferer. I do 
not m the least mean to say that we must never pass Judge­
ment m the cases of persons whom we desire to help and 
improve. But if the doctor wishes to help a human being 
he must be able to accept bun as he is. And he can do tlus 
ill reality only when he has already seen and accepted 1umself 
as he is 
Perhaps this sounds very sunple, but simple things are 
always the most difficult In actual life it reqwres the 
greatest discipline to be simple, and the acceptance of 
oneself is the essence of the moral problem and the epitome 
of a whole outlook upon life. That I feed the hungry, that 
I forgive an insult, that I love my enemy in the name of 
Christ-all these are undoubtedly great virtues. What I 
do unto the least of my brethren, that I do unto Christ. 
But what if I should discover that the least amongst them 
all, the poorest of all the beggars, the most impudent of all 
the oflender.!, the very enemy himself-that these are ~ 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comz7z PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
me, and that I myself stand in need of the alms of my own 
kindness-that I myself am the enemy who must be loved.­
what then ? As a rule, the Christian's att:Jtude is then 
reversed ; there is no longer any question of love or long­
suflering ; we say to the brother within us " Ra.ea ", and 
condemn and rage against ourselves We hide it from the 
world , we refuse to admit ever having met this least among 
the lowly in ourselves. Had it been God himself who drew 
near to us in this despicable form, we should have denied 
him a thousand times before a single cock had crowed. 
The man who uses modern psychology to look behind the 
scenes not only of his patients' hves but more espeaally of 
his own-and the modem psychotherapist must do tlus if 
he is not to be merely an unconscious fraud-will admit 
that to accept himself in all his wretchedness is the hardest 
of tasks, and one wluch 1t is almost impossible to fulfil 
The very thought can make us livid with fear We therefore 
do not hesitate, but lightheartedly choose the compbcated 
course of remaming in ignorance about ourselves wlule 
busying ourselves with other people and their troubles and 
sins. This activity lends us an air of virtue, and we thus 
deceive ourselves and those around us. In this way, thank 
God, we can escape from ourselves There are countless 
people who can do this with impunity, but not everyone 
can, and these few break down on the roa.d to Damascus 
and succumb to a neurosis. How can I help these persons 
if I am myself a fugitive, and perhaps also suffer from the 
fflOl'6us ,..,. of a neurosis l Only he who has fully accepted 
himself has " unprejudiced objectivity ". But no one is 
justified in boasting that he has fully accepted himself. 
We can point to Christ, who offered his traditional lnas as 
a sacrifice to the god in himself, and so lived his life as it was 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 273 
to the bitter end without regard for conventions or for the 
moral standards of the Pharisees. 
We Protestants must sooner or later face this question : 
Are we to understand the " inutation of Chnst " in the sense 
that we should copy bis li1e and, ,f I may use the expression, 
ape his stigmata ; or m the deeper sense that we are to hve 
our own proper hves as truly as he lived his in all its un­
plications ? It is no easy matter to live a life that is modelled 
on Christ's, but it 1s unspeakably harder to live one's own 
life as truly as Christ bved his Anyone who chd this would 
run counter to the forces of the past, and though he might 
thus be fuUilling his destmy, would none the less be mis­
judged, derided, tortured and crucified He would be a 
kind of mad Bolshevist who deserved the cross We there­
fore prefer the historically sanctioned 1DUtabon of Christ 
which is transfigured by hohness I should never disturb 
a monk in hts practice of identifying himself with Christ, 
for he deserves our respect. But neither I nor my patients 
are monks, and it is my duty as a physician to show my 
patients how they can hve their lives without becoming 
neurotic. Neurosis is an inner cleavage-the state of being 
at war with oneself. Everythmg that accentuates this 
cleavage makes the patient worse, and everythmg that 
mitigates it tends to heal the patient. What dnves people 
to war with themselves is the intuition or the knowledge 
that they consist of two persons m opposition to one another. 
The conflict may be between the sensual and the spintual 
man, or between the ego and the shadow. It is what Faust 
means when he says . " Two souls, alas, dwell in my breast 
apart ". A neurosis is a dissociation of personahty. 
Heahng may he called a religious problem In the sphere 
of social or national relations, the state of suffering may be 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com274 PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
civil war, and this state is to be cured by the Christian virtue 
of forgiveness for those who hate us That which we try 
with the conviction of good Chrisballs to apply to external 
situatwns, we must also apply to the inner state in the 
treatment of neurosis. This is why modem man has heard 
enough about guilt and sm. He is sorely enough beset by 
his awn bad conscience, and wants rather to learn how he 
is to reconcile hunself with his own nature-how he is to 
love the enemy in his own heart and call the wolf his 
brother. 
The modern man, moreover, is not eager to know m what 
way he can inntate Christ, but in what way be can live his 
own mdividual hfe, however meagre and uninterestmg 1t 
may be. It IS because every form of inutation. seems to h1m 
deadening and stenle that he rebels against the force of 
tradition that would hold him to well-trodden ways. All 
such roads, for him, lead in the wrong mrection. He may 
not know 1t, but he behaves as if his own individual life were 
instinct with the will of God which must at all costs be 
fulfilled. Tius is the source of 1us egoism, w1nch is one of 
the most tangible ev,ls of the neorobc state. But the person 
who tells him he is too egoistic has lost his confidence, and 
rightly so, for that person has driven him still further mto 
his neurosis. 
If I wish to effect a cure for my patients I am forced to 
acknowledge the deep s,gmficance of the,r egoism. I should 
be blind, md.eed, if I did not recognize in it the true will of 
God. I must even help the patient to prevail in his egoism ; 
if he succeeds in this, he estranges himself from other people. 
He dnves them away, and they come to themselves----as 
they should. for they were seeking to rob him of his " sacred " 
egoism This must be left to him, for it is his strongest and 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 275 
healthiest power , 1t is, as I have salll., a true will of God, 
which sometimes dnves lum mto complete isolatum.. How­
ever wretched this state may be, 1t also stands him in good 
stead, for in tins way alone can he take his own measure and 
learn what an invaluable treasure is the love of his fellow­
bemgs. It is, moreover, only m the state of complete 
abandonment and lonehness that we expenence the helpful 
powers of our own natures. 
When one has several times seen this development take 
place one can no longer deny that what was evil has turned 
to good, and that what seemed good has kept alive the forces 
of evtl The archdemon of egolSill leads us along the royal 
road to that mgathenng whlch rehgious expenence demands. 
What we observe here is a fundamental law of We----,n.. 
am,od,omia-the reversal mto the oppos1te ; and tlus it is 
that makes poss1ble the reuruon of the wamng halves of the 
personality and thereby bnngs the c1vtl war to an end. 
I have taken the neurotic's egoism as an example because 
1t is one of lus most common symptoms. I rmght equally 
well have taken any other charactensbc symptom to show 
what attitude the physician must adopt towards the short­
comings of his patients, and how he must deal with the 
problem of evil. 
No doubt tins also sounds very sunple. In reality, however, 
the acceptance of the shadow-Sld.e of human nature verges 
on the impossible CoDSlder for a moment what it means to 
grant the right of existence to what is unreasonable, senseless 
and evil I Yet it is just this that the modem man insists 
upon. He wants to hve with every side of himself-to know 
what he is. That is why he casts history aside. He wants 
to break with tradition so that he can experiment with his 
life and determine what value and meaning things have in 
.. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com27fi PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
themselves, apart from traditiDDal presuppositions. Modern 
youth gives us astomshing examples of this attitude. To 
show how far th1s tendency may go, I will instance a 
question addressed to me by a German society, I was asked 
if incest is to be reprobated, and what facts can be adduced 
against it I 
Granted such tendencies, the conflicts into which people 
may fall are not ha.nl to imagme I can well understand that 
one would like to leave nothJ.ng untned to protect one's 
fellow-beings from such adventures But cunously enough 
we find ourselves without means to do this. All the old 
arguments against uoreasonableness, self-deceptum and 
immorality, once so potent, have lost their effectiveness 
We are now reaping the fruit of mneteenth-century education. 
Throughout that period the Church preached to young 
people the merit of bhnd faith, while tbe univemties in­
culcated an intellectual rationahsm, with the result that 
today we plead in vain whether for faith or reason. Tired 
of tlus warfare of opmwns, the modem man wishes to find 
out for himself how thmgs are. And though this desire 
opens bar and bolt to tbe most dangerous possibilities, we 
cannot help seeing it as a. courageous enterprise and giving 
it some measure of sympathy. It JS no reckless adventure, 
bnt an effort inspired by deep spiritual chstress to brmg 
meaning once more into hfe on the basis of fresh and un­
prejudiced expenence. Caution has its place, no doubt, 
but we cannot refuse our support to a serious venture which 
calls tbe whole of the personality into the field of -.in. 
If we oppose it, we are trying to suppress what lS best in 
man-his daring and his aspiration. And should we succeed, 
we should only have stood in the way of that invaluable 
experience which might have given a meaning to life What 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY z77 
would have happened if Paul had allowed himself to be 
talked out of his Journey to Damascus ? 
The psychotherapist who takes !us work seriously must 
come to grips with this question. He must decule in every 
single case whether or not he is willing to stand by a human 
bemg with counsel and help upon what may be a daring 
misadventure. He must have no fixed ideas as to what is 
nght, nor must he pretend to know what IS right and what 
not-otherwise he takes somethmg from the richness of 
the experience He must keep in view what actually happens 
-and only that which acts, is actual. If something wluch 
seems to me an error shows rtself to be more effective than 
a truth, then I must first follow up the error, for in 1t be 
power and life which I lose if I hold to what seems to me 
true. Light has need of darkness----otherwise how could 1t 
appear as hght > 
It IS well known that Freudian psychoanalysis is limited 
to the task of makmg CODSClOUS the shadow-side and the 
evtl witlun us. It simply biinss mto action the civtl war 
that was latent, and lets 1t go at that. The patient must 
deal with 1t as best he can Freud has unfortunately over­
looked the fact that man has never yet been able smgle­
handed to hold his own agamst the powers of darknes&­
th.at is, of the unconscious Man has always stood in need of 
the spmtual help wluch each uuhvidual's own religion held 
out to lum. The opening up of the unconSClOUS always means 
the outbreak of inteuse spjritual suflenng ; it is as when a 
ftourishlng civilizatinn IS abandnned to mvading hordes of 
barbarians, or when fertile fields are exposed by the bursting 
of a dam to a raging torrent. The World War was such an 
irruption which showed, as nothing else could, how thin are 
the walls which separate a well-ordered world from lurking 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com2,S PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
chaos. But it is the same with every smgle human being 
and lus reasonably ordered world. His reason has doue 
violence to natural forces winch seek their revenge and only 
await the moment when the partition falls to overwhelm 
the conscious life with destruction. Man has been aware 
of tlus danger since the earliest times, even in the most 
primitive stages of culture. It was to arm himself against 
this threat and to heal the damage dooe, that he developed 
religious and magical practices. This ,. why the 
medicine-man IS also the priest ; he is the saviour of the 
body as well as of the soul, and rehgums are systems of 
heahng for psychic illness. This is espeaa.lly true of the 
two greatest religious of man, Chnstiamty and Buddhism 
Man is uever helped m his suffering by whst he thmks for 
himself, but only by revelatious of a WlSdom greater than his 
own. It is this which lifts him out of Ins distress. 
Today thlS eruptioo of destructive forces hss already 
takeo place, and man suffers from 1t 111 spirit. Thst is why 
pa:bents force the psychothempist mto the rBle of a pnest, 
and expect and demand of hun that he shall free them from 
their distress. Thst is why we psychothera(llSts must 
occupy ourselves with problems winch, strictly speakmg, 
belong to the theologian. But we cannot leave these ques­
tious for theology to answer ; the urgent, psychic needs of 
sullermg people confront us with them day after day. Since, 
as a rule, every coucept and viewpoint hsuded down from 
the past fails us, we must first tread with the patient the 
path of his illness-the path of lus llUStake that sharpens 
his conflicts and iJlcreases his loucliness till 1t grows Ull• 
bearable-hoping that from the psychic depths which cast up 
the powers of destructioo the rescuing f0:t<es will come also. 
When fint I took tlus direction I did not know where 1t 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY z79 
would lead. I did not know what lay hid in the depths of 
the psyclie-thzt region which I have since called the 
" collective unconscious ". and whose contents I designate 
as " archetypes ". Since tune unmemorial, eruptions of the 
unconscious have taken place, and ever and again they have 
repeated themselves. Consciousness did not exist from the 
beginning, and in every child 1t has to be built up anew in 
the fimt years of hie. Consciousness is very weak in this 
formative period, and history shows us that the same is 
true of mankmd-the unconscious easily seizes power. 
These struggles have left their marks To put it in scientific 
terms : instinctive defence-mechanisms have been developed 
wluch automatically intervene when the danger 18 greatest, 
and their commg into action JS represented in fantasy by 
helpful images wluch are meradicably fured in the hunian 
psyche. These mechanisms come into play whenever the 
need is great. Science can only establish the existence of 
these psychic la.cto,s and attempt a rational explanation by 
offermg an hypothesis as to their sources. Tlus, however, 
only thrusts the problem a stage back and in no way answers 
the nddle. We thus come to those ultimate queshons: 
Whence does oonsciousness come 1 What is the psyche 1 
And at this point all saence ends 
It is as though, at the culmination of the illness, the 
destructive powers were converted into heabng forces. This 
is brought about by the fa.et that the arehetypes come to 
independent hie and serve as spiritual guides for the 
personality, thus supplantmg the inadequate ego with its 
futile willmg and stnw,g. As the religious-minded person 
would say . guidance has come from God. With most of 
my patients I have to avoid this formulabon, for it reminds 
them too much of what they have to reiect I must express 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com:z8o PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR IBE CLERGY 
myseH in more modest terms, and say that the psyche has 
awakened to spontaneous life And indeed this formula 
more closely fits the observable facts. The transformation 
takes place at that moment when in dreams or fantasies 
themes appear whose source in cOilSClOUSDess cannot be 
shown. To the patient ,t is nothing less than a revelation 
when, from the hidden depths of the psyche, something 
arises to confront him-thmg strange that is not the 
" I " and is therefore beyond the reach of personal caprice 
He has gained access to the sources of psyclnc life, and this 
marks the begmning of the cure. 
This process. if it is to be made clear. should undoubtedly 
be discwsed with the help of suitable examples But it IS 
almost imposs1ble to find one or more convincing illustrations, 
for it is usually a most subtle and complicated matter. That 
which is so effective is often simply the deep impression 
made on the patient by the indePendent way m wluch his 
dreams treat of his ddliculties Or it may be that his fantasy 
points to something for whicll his cooscious mind was qurte 
unprepared. Most often ,t is contents of an archetypal 
nature, connected in a certain way, that exert a strong 
influence of their own whether or not they are understood 
by the conscious mind. This spontaoeous activity of the 
psyche often becomes so intense that visionary pictures are 
seen or inner voices heard. These are manifestations of the 
spirit directly experienced today as they have been from 
tune immemorial. 
Such expenences reward the sufferer for the pains of the 
labyrinthme way. From this point forward a hght shines 
through his confusion ; he can reconcile himself with the 
warfare within and so come to bridge the morbid split in his 
nature upon a higher level. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 28r 
The fundamental problems of modem psychotherapy are 
so important and far-reaching that their discussion in an 
essay precludes any presentation of details, however desirable 
this might be for clarity's sake. My main purpose was to 
set forth the attitude of the psychotherapist in his work. 
A proper understandmg of this is after all more rewarding 
than to cull a few precepts and pomters as to methods of 
treatment. for these are m any case not effective unless they 
are applied with the nght understand.mg The attitude of 
the psychotherapist is mfimtely more important than the 
theones and methods of psychotherapy, and that is why I 
have been concerned to make tlus attitude known I 
beheve that I have given a trustworthy account As for 
the questions m what way and how far the clergyman can 
JOtn the psychotherap1St m lus efforts and endeavours, I 
can only rmpart information which will allow others to 
decide I also heh.eve that the picture I have drawn of the 
spiritual outlook of modern man coITeSponds to the actual 
state of affairs----though, of course, I make no claim to 
mfalhbw.ty In any case, what I have had to say about tbe 
cure of the neuroses, and the problems involved, is the 
unvarnished truth. We doctors would naturally welcome 
tbe sympathetic understanding of tbe clergy in our en­
deavours to heal psyclnc suffering, but we are also fully 
aware of the fundamental drlliculties which stand in the way 
of a full cooperahon. My own position is on the extreme 
left wing of the congress of Protestant opinion, yet I would 
be tbe fimt to warn people agamst generalizing from their 
own experience in an mjudicious way. As a Swiss, I am an 
inveterate democrat, yet I recognize that nature is aristo­
cratic and, what is even more, esoteric Quad heel Jovi-, non 
hcet booi is an unpleasant but an eternal truth. Who are 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com28o PSYCHOTHERAPISTS OR THE CLERGY 
forgiven their many sins ? Those who have loved much. 
Bat as to those who love httle, their few sins are held against 
them. I am firmly convinced that a vast number of people 
belong to the fold of the Cathohc Church and nowhere else, 
because they are most suitably housed there I am as much 
persuaded of this as of the fact, wluch I have myself observed, 
that a primitive religion is better suited to primitive people 
than Christianity, which is so incomprehensible to them and 
so foreign to their blood that they can only ape it m a dis­
gusting way. I believe, too, that there must be protestants 
against the Catholic Church, and also protestants agamst 
Protestantism-for the manifestations of the spmt are truly 
wondrous, and as varied as CreatJ.on itself. 
The living spmt grows and even outgrows 1ts earher 
forms of expression ; it freely chooses the m.en in whom 1t 
hves and who proclaim it Thls living spmt is eternally 
renewed and puisues its goal m mamfold and mconceivable 
ways throughout the history of mankind Measured agamst 
it, the names and forms which men have given it mean httle 
enough ; they are only the changmg leaves and blossoms 
on the stem of the eternal tree. 
THE END 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com