ld	try	the	exercise	before	reading	on.
	
Figure	2
	
You	were	almost	certainly	successful	in	saying	the	correct	words	in	both	tasks,	and	you
surely	discovered	that	some	parts	of	each	task	were	much	easier	than	others.	When	youidentified	upper- and	lowercase,	the	left-hand	column	was	easy	and	the	right-hand	column
caused	you	to	slow	down	and	perhaps	to	stammer	or	stumble.	When	you	named	the
position	of	words,	the	left-hand	column	was	difficult	and	the	right-hand	column	was	much
easier.
These	tasks	engage	System	2,	because	saying	“upper/lower”	or	“right/left”	is	not	what
you	routinely	do	when	looking	down	a	column	of	words.	One	of	the	things	you	did	to	set
yourself	for	the	task	was	to	program	your	memory	so	that	the	relevant	words	(
upper and	lower for	the	first	task)	were	“on	the	tip	of	your	tongue.”	The	prioritizing.of	the	chosen
words	is	effective	and	the	mild	temptation	to	read	other	words	was	fairly	easy	to	resist
when	you	went	through	the	first	column.	But	the	second	column	was	different,	because	it
contained	words	for	which	you	were	set,	and	you	could	not	ignore	them.	You	were	mostly
able	to	respond	correctly,	but	overcoming	the	competing	response	was	a	strain,	and	it
slowed	you	down.	You	experienced	a	conflict	between	a	task	that	you	intended	to	carry
out	and	an	automatic	response	that	interfered	with	it.
Conflict	between	an	automatic	reaction	and	an	intention	to	conWhetion to	ctrol	it	is
common	in	our	lives.	We	are	all	familiar	with	the	experience	of	trying	not	to	stare	at	the
oddly	dressed	couple	at	the	neighboring	table	in	a	restaurant.	We	also	know	what	it	is	like
to	force	our	attention	on	a	boring	book,	when	we	constantly	find	ourselves	returning	to	the
point	at	which	the	reading	lost	its	meaning.	Where	winters	are	hard,	many	drivers	have
memories	of	their	car	skidding	out	of	control	on	the	ice	and	of	the	struggle	to	follow	well-
rehearsed	instructions	that	negate	what	they	would	naturally	do:	“Steer	into	the	skid, and
whatever	 you	 do,	 do	 not	 touch	 the	 brakes!”	 And	 every	 human	 being	 has	 had	 the
experience	of	
not
	telling	someone	to	go	to	hell.	One	of	the	tasks	of	System	2	is	to
overcome	the	impulses	of	System	1.	In	other	words,	System	2	is	in	charge	of	self-control.
Illusions
	
To	appreciate	the	autonomy	of	System	1,	as	well	as	the	distinction	between	impressions
and	beliefs,	take	a	good	look	at	figure	3.
This	 picture	 is	 unremarkable:	 two	 horizontal	 lines	 of	 different	 lengths,	 with	 fins
appended,	pointing	in	different	directions.	The	bottom	line	is	obviously	longer	than	the
one	above	it.	That	is	what	we	all	see,	and	we	naturally	believe	what	we	see.	If	you	have
already	encountered	this	image,	however,	you	recognize	it	as	the	famous	Müller-Lyer
illusion.	As	you	can	easily	confirm	by	measuring	them	with	a	ruler,	the	horizontal	lines
are	in	fact	identical	in	length.	
Figure	3
	
Now	that	you	have	measured	the	lines,	you—your	System	2,	the	conscious	being	you
call	“I”—have	a	new	belief:	you	
know
	that	the	lines	are	equally	long.	If	asked	about	their
length,	you	will	say	what	you	know.	But	you	still	
see
	the	bottom	line	as	longer.	You	have
chosen	to	believe	the	measurement,	but	you	cannot	prevent	System	1	from	doing	its	thing;
you	cannot	decide	to	see	the	lines	as	equal,	although	you	know	they	are.	To	resist	the
illusion,	there	is	only	one	thing	you	can	do:	you	must	learn	to	mistrust	your	impressions	of
the	length	of	lines	when	fins	are	attached	to	them.	To	implement	that	rule,	you	must	be
able	to	recognize	the	illusory	pattern	and	recall	what	you	know	about	it.	If	you	can	do	this,
you	will	never	again	be	fooled	by	the	Müller-Lyer	illusion.	But	you	will	still	see	one	line
as	longer	than	the	other.
Not	all	illusions	are	visual.	There	are	illusions	of	thought,	which	we	call	
cognitive
illusions
.	 As	 a	 graduate	 student,	 I	 attended	 some	 courses	 on	 the	 art	 and	 science	 of
psychotherapy.	During	one	of	these	lectures,	our	teacher	imparted	a	morsel	of	clinical
wisdom.	This	is	what	he	told	us:	“You	will	from	time	to	time	meet	a	patient	who	shares	a
disturbing	tale	of	multiple	mistakes	in	his	previous	treatment.	He	has	been	seen	by	several
clinicians,	 and	 all	 failed	 him.	 The	 patient	 can	 lucidly	 describe	 how	 his	 therapists
misunderstood	him,	but	he	has	quickly	perceived	that	you	are	different.	You	share	the
same	feeling,	are	convinced	that	you	understand	him,	and	will	be	able	to	help.”	At	this	point,
the	text abruptly ends with "drive	on	an	empty	highway	while	conduc", which seems to be a part of the intended sentence.