Ed Diener, "Most People Are Happy," Psychological Science 7(1996): 181-85.

Gallup World Poll:
For a number of years I have been one of several Senior Scientists associated with the efforts of the Gallup Organization in the domain of well-being. More than 450,000 responses.

Daniel Kahneman and Angus Deaton, "High Income Improves Evaluation of Life but Not Emotional Well-Being," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(2010): 16489–93.

Worse for the very poor: Dylan M. Smith, Kenneth M. Langa, Mohammed U. Kabeto, and Peter Ubel, "Health, Wealth, and Happiness: Financial Resources Buffer Subjective Well-Being After the Onset of a Disability," Psychological Science 16(2005): 663–66.

$75,000 in high-cost areas:
In a TED talk I presented in February 2010 I mentioned a preliminary estimate of $60,000, which was later corrected.

Eat a bar of chocolate!
Jordi Quoidbach, Elizabeth W. Dunn, K. V. Petrides, and Moïra Mikolajczak, "Money Giveth, Money Taketh Away: The Dual Effect of Wealth on Happiness," Psychological Science 21(2010): 759–63.

38: Thinking About Life

German Socio-Economic Panel:
Andrew E. Clark, Ed Diener, and Yannis Georgellis, "Lags and Leads in Life Satisfaction: A Test of the Baseline Hypothesis." Paper presented at the German Socio-Economic Panel Conference, Berlin, Germany, 2001.

Affective forecasting: Daniel T. Gilbert and Timothy D. Wilson, "Why the Brain Talks to Itself: Sources of Error in Emotional Prediction," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 364(2009): 1335–41.

Only significant fact in their life:
Strack, Martin, and Schwarz, "Priming and Communication."

Questionnaire on life satisfaction:
The original study was reported by Norbert Schwarz in his doctoral thesis (in German) "Mood as Information: On the Impact of Moods on the Evaluation of One's Life" (Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 1987). It has been described in many places, notably Norbert Schwarz and Fritz Strack, "Reports of Subjective Well-Being: Judgmental Processes and Their Methodological Implications," in Kahneman, Diener, and Schwarz, Well-Being, 61–84.

Goals that young people set:
The study was described in William G. Bowen and Derek Curtis Bok, The Shape of the River: Long-Term Consequences of Considering Race in College and University Admissions (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998). Some of Bowen and Bok's findings were reported by Carol Nickerson, Norbert Schwarz, and Ed Diener, "Financial Aspirations, Financial Success, and Overall Life Satisfaction: Who? and How?" Journal of Happiness Studies 8(2007): 467–515.

"Being very well-off financially":
Alexander Astin, M. R. King, and G. T. Richardson, The American Freshman: National Norms for Fall 1976, Cooperative Institutional Research Program of the American Council on Education and the University of California at Los Angeles, Graduate School of Education, Laboratory for Research in Higher Education, 1976.

Money was not important:
These results were presented in a talk at the American Economic Association annual meeting in 2004. Daniel Kahneman, "Puzzles of Well-Being," paper presented at the meeting.

Happiness of Californians:
The question of how well people today can forecast the feelings of their descendants a hundred years from now is clearly relevant to the policy response to climate change, but it can be studied only indirectly, which is what we proposed to do.

Aspects of their lives:
In posing the question, I was guilty of a confusion that I now try to avoid: Happiness and life satisfaction are not synonymous. Life satisfaction refers to your thoughts and feelings when you think about your life, which happens occasionally—including in surveys of well-being. Happiness describes the feelings people have as they live their normal life.

I had won the family argument:
However, my wife has never conceded. She claims that only residents of Northern California are happier.

Students in California and in the Midwest:
Asian students generally reported lower satisfaction with their lives, and Asian students made up a much larger proportion of the samples in California than in the Midwest. Allowing for this difference, life satisfaction in the two regions was identical.

How much pleasure do you get from your car?
Jing Xu and Norbert Schwarz have found that the quality of the car (as measured by Blue Book value) predicts the owners' answer to a general question about their enjoyment of the car, and also predicts people's pleasure during joyrides. But the quality of the car has no effect on people's mood during normal commutes.

Norbert Schwarz, Daniel Kahneman, and Jing Xu, "Global and Episodic Reports of Hedonic Experience," in R. Belli, D. Alwin, and F. Stafford (eds.), Using Calendar and Diary Methods in Life Events Research (Newbury Park, CA: Sage), pp. 157–74.

Paraplegics spend in pain:
Progress has been especially rapid in the UK, where the use of measures of well-being is now official government policy. These advances were due in good part to the influence of Lord Richard Layard's book Happiness: Lessons from a New Science, first published in 2005. Layard is among the prominent economists and social scientists who have been drawn into the study of well-being and its implications.

Other important sources:
Derek Bok, The Politics of Happiness: What Government Can Learn from the New Research on Well-Being (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010). Ed Diener, Richard Lucus, Ulrich Schmimmack, and John F. Helliwell, Well-Being for Public Policy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009). Alan B. Krueger, ed., Measuring the Subjective Well-Being of Nations: National Account of Time Use and Well-Being (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009). Joseph E. Stiglitz, Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi, Report of the Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress. Paul Dolan, Richard Layard, and Robert Metcalfe, Measuring Subjective Well-being for Public Policy: Recommendations on Measures (London: Office for National Statistics, 2011).

Irrational is a strong word:
The view of the mind that Dan Ariely has presented in Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions (New York: Harper, 2008) is not much different from mine, but we differ in our use of the term.

Accept future addiction:
Gary S. Becker and Kevin M. Murphy, "A Theory of Rational Addiction," Journal of Political Economics 96(1988): 675–700. Nudge: Richard H. Thaler