wrong.

Psychologists at the University of Chicago published an article with the attractive title "Money, Kisses, and Electric Shocks: On the Affective Psychology of Risk." Their finding was that the valuation of gambles was much less sensitive to probability when the (fictitious) outcomes were emotional ("meeting and kissing your favorite movie star" or "getting a painful, but not dangerous, electric shock") than when the outcomes were gains or losses of cash. This was not an isolated finding. Other researchers had found, using physiological measures such as heart rate, that the fear of an impending electric shock was essentially uncorrelated with the probability of receiving the shock. The mere possibility of a shock triggered the full-blown fear response. The Chicago team proposed that "affect-laden imagery" overwhelmed the response to probability. Ten years later, a team of psychologists at Princeton challenged that conclusion.

The Princeton team argued that the low sensitivity to probability that had been observed for emotional outcomes is normal. Gambles on money are the exception. The sensitivity to probability is relatively high for these gambles, because they have a definite expected value.

What amount of cash is as attractive as each of these gambles?

A. 84% chance to win $59
B. 84% chance to receive one dozen red roses in a glass vase

What do you notice? The salient difference is that question A is much easier than question B. You did not stop to compute the expected value of the bet, but you probably knew quickly that it is not far from $50 (in fact, it is $49.56), and the vague estimate was sufficient to provide a helpful anchor as you searched for an equally attractive cash gift. No such anchor is available for question B, which is therefore much harder to answer.

Respondents also assessed the cash equivalent of gambles with a 21% chance to win the two outcomes. As expected, the difference between the high-probability and low-probability gambles was much more pronounced for the money than for the roses.

To bolster their argument that insensitivity to probability is not caused by emotion, the Princeton team compared willingness to pay to avoid gambles:

21% chance (or 84%) chance to spend a weekend painting someone's three-bedroom apartment

21% chance (or 84%) chance to clean three stalls in a dormitory bathroom after a weekend of use

The second outcome is surely much more emotional than the first, but the decision weights for the two outcomes did not differ. Evidently, the intensity of emotion is not the answer.

Another experiment yielded a surprising result. The participants received explicit price information along with the verbal description of the prize. An example could be:

84% chance to win: A dozen red roses in a glass vase. Value $59.

21% chance to win: A dozen red roses in a glass vase. Value $59.

It is easy to assess the expected monetary value of these gambles, but adding a specific monetary value did not alter the results: evaluations remained insensitive to probability even in that condition. People who thought of the gift as a chance to get roses did not use price information as an anchor in evaluating the gamble. As scientists sometimes say, this is a surprising finding that is trying to tell us something. What story is it trying to tell us?

The story, I believe, is that a rich and vivid representation of the outcome, whether or not it is emotional, reduces the role of probability in the evaluation of an uncertain prospect. This hypothesis suggests a prediction, in which I have reasonably high confidence: adding irrelevant but vivid details to a monetary outcome also disrupts calculation. Compare your cash equivalents for the following outcomes:

21% (or 84%) chance to receive $59 next Monday

21% (or 84%) chance to receive a large blue cardboard envelope containing $59 next Monday morning

The new hypothesis is that there will be less sensitivity to probability in the second case, because the blue envelope evokes a richer and more fluent representation than the abstract notion of a sum of money. You constructed the event in your mind, and the vivid image of the outcome exists there even if you know that its probability is low. Cognitive ease contributes to the certainty effect as well: when you hold a vivid image of an event, the possibility of its not occurring is also represented vividly, and overweighted. The combination of an enhanced possibility effect with an enhanced certainty effect leaves little room for decision weights to change between chances of 21% and 84%.

Vivid Probabilities

The idea that fluency, vividness, and the ease of imagining contribute to decision weights gains support from many other observations. Participants in a well-known experiment are given a choice of drawing a marble from one of two urns, in which red marbles win a prize:

Urn A contains 10 marbles, of which 1 is red.
Urn B contains 100 marbles, of which 8 are red.

Which urn would you choose? The chances of winning are 10% in Urn A and 8% in Urn B, so making the right choice should be easy, but it is not: about 30%–40% of students choose the urn B (with the larger number of winning marbles), rather than the urn that provides a better chance of winning. Seymour Epstein has argued that the results illustrate the superficial processing characteristic of System 1 (which he calls the experiential system).

As you might expect, the remarkably foolish choices that people make in this situation have attracted the attention of many researchers. The bias has been given several names; following Paul Slovic I will call it denominator neglect. If your attention is drawn to the winning marbles, you do not assess the number of nonwinning marbles with the same care. Vivid imagery contributes to denominator neglect, at least as I experience it.

When I think of the small urn, I see a single red marble on a vaguely defined background of white marbles. When I think of the larger urn, I see eight winning red marbles on an indistinct background of white marbles, which creates a more hopeful feeling. The distinctive vividness of the winning marbles in increases the decision weight of that event, enhancing the possibility effect. Of course, the same will be true of the certainty effect. If I have a 90% chance of winning a prize, the event of not winning will be more salient if 10 of 100 marbles are "losers" than if 1 of 10 marbles yields the same outcome.

The idea of denominator neglect helps explain why different ways of communicating risks vary so much in their effects. You read that "a vaccine that protects children from a fatal disease carries a 0.001% risk of permanent disability." The risk appears small. Now consider another description of the same risk: "One of 100,000 vaccinated children will be permanently disabled." The second statement does something to your mind that the first does not: it calls up the image of an individual child who is permanently disabled by a vaccine; the 999,999 safely vaccinated children have faded into the background. As predicted by denominator neglect, low-probability events are much more heavily weighted when described in terms of relative frequencies (how many) than when stated in more abstract terms of "chances," "risk," or "probability" (how likely). As we have seen, System 1 is much better at dealing with individuals than categories.

The effect of the frequency format is large. In one study, people who saw information about "a disease that kills 1,286 people out of every 10,000" judged it as more dangerous than people who were told about "a disease that kills 24.14% of the population." The first disease appears more threatening than the second, although the former risk is only half as large as the latter! In an even more dire situation, when presented with information about a disease that kills 10 out of every 1,000 people, subjects were much more likely to choose not to vaccinate themselves than if they were told that there was a 1% chance (or even a 2% chance) of contracting the disease.

Understanding these principles can help make risk communication more effective. By using vivid and specific examples rather than abstract probabilities, we can better engage our emotional responses and make more rational decisions.