If we let these opinions go? Let’s try weeding (ekkoptein; cutting or knocking out) them out of our lives so that things simply are. Not good or bad, not colored with opinion or judgment. Just are.

April 19th

OUR SPHERE OF IMPULSES

Epictetus says we must discover the missing art of assent and pay special attention to the sphere of our impulses—that they are subject to reservation, to the common good, and that they are in proportion to actual worth.”

—
Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 11.37

Here we have the emperor, the most powerful man in the world, quoting in his diary the wisdom of a former slave (and from what we know, Marcus might have had direct notes from Epictetus’s lectures via one of his former students). That wisdom was ultimately about surrender and serving the common good—about the limits of our power and the importance of checking our impulses—something every person in authority needs to hear.

Power and powerlessness seem so rarely to enter the same orbit—but when they do, it can change the world. Think about President Abraham Lincoln meeting with, corresponding with, and learning from Frederick Douglass, another former slave of considerable wisdom and insight.

In any case, all those men lived by the principles expressed here: that in our lives—whether we’re experiencing great power or powerlessness—it’s critical to leave room for what may happen and keep the common good and the actual worth of things front and center. And, above all, be willing to learn from anyone and everyone, regardless of their station in life.

April 20th

REAL GOOD IS SIMPLE

Here’s a way to think about what the masses regard as being ‘good’ things. If you would first start by setting your mind upon things that are unquestionably good—wisdom, self-control, justice, courage—with this preconception you’ll no longer be able to listen to the popular refrain that there are too many good things to experience in a lifetime.”

—

Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 5.12

Is it that controversial to say that there are the things that people value (and pressure you to value as well)—and there are the things that are actually good? Or to question whether wealth and fame are all they’re cracked up to be? As Seneca observed in one of his plays:

“If only the hearts of the wealthy were open to all!
How great the fears high fortune stirs up within them.”

For centuries, people have assumed that wealth would be a wonderful cure-all for their unhappiness or problems. Why else would they have worked so hard for it? But when people actually acquired the money and status they craved, they discovered it wasn’t quite what they had hoped. The same is true of so many things we covet without really thinking.

On the other hand, the ‘good’ that the Stoics advocate is simpler and more straightforward: wisdom, self-control, justice, courage. No one who achieves these quiet virtues experiences buyer’s remorse.

April 21st

DON’T LET YOUR ATTENTION SLIDE

“When you let your attention slide for a bit, don’t think you will get back a grip on it whenever you wish—instead, bear in mind that because of today’s mistake everything that follows will be necessarily worse. . . . Is it possible to be free from error? Not by any means, but it is possible to be a person always stretching to avoid error. For we must be content to at least escape a few mistakes by never letting our attention slide.”

—

Epictetus, Discourses, 4.12.1; 19

Inifred Gallagher, in her book Rapt, quotes David Meyer, a cognitive scientist at the University of Michigan: “Einstein didn’t invent the theory of relativity while he was multitasking at the Swiss patent office.” It came after, when he really had time to focus and study. Attention matters—and in an era in which our attention is being fought for by every new app, website, article, book, tweet, and post, its value has only gone up.

Part of what Epictetus is saying here is that attention is a habit, and that letting your attention slip and wander builds bad habits and enables mistakes. You’ll never complete all your tasks if you allow yourself to be distracted with every tiny interruption. Your attention is one of your most critical resources. Don’t squander it!

April 22nd

THE MARKS OF A RATIONAL PERSON

“These are the characteristics of the rational soul: self-awareness, self-examination, and self-determination. It reaps its own harvest. . . . It succeeds in its own purpose .. .”

—

Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 11.1–2

To be rational today, we have to do just three things:

First, we must look inward.

Next, we must examine ourselves critically.

Finally, we must make our own decisions—uninhibited by biases or popular notions.

April 23rd

THE MIND IS ALL YOURS

“You have been formed of three parts—body, breath, and mind. Of these, the first two are yours insofar as they are only in your care. The third alone is truly yours.”

—

Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 12.3

The body can be ravaged by disease or injured or disabled in a sudden accident. It can be imprisoned or subjected to torture. The breath can suddenly cease because our time has come, or because someone has taken it from us. Breathing can grow labored because of exertion or illness as well. But up until the very end, our mind is ours.

It’s not that the other two parts of life that Marcus mentions—body and breath—are not important. It’s just that they are not under our control. We have no choice but to accept them as they come and go. The only thing we can truly control is our mind. That’s why it’s so important to take good care of it.

April 24th

A MAN IS NOT WHAT HE THINKS

“A man is not what he thinks, nor does the mind see itself with its own eyes, just as a painter sees his work by another’s eye and a sculptor hears himself speaking through others’ mouths.”

—

Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 7.38

We often think that our thoughts define us. But that’s not true. Our thoughts are products of our minds, and our minds are the product of our experiences. We can choose how we think by changing our experiences.

April 25th

THERE’S NOTHING WRONG WITH BEING WRONG

“If anyone can prove and show to me that I think and act in error, I will gladly change it—for I seek the truth, by which no one has ever been harmed. The one who is harmed is the one who abides in deceit and ignorance.”

—

Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 6.21

Someone once attempted to argue with the philosopher Cicero by quoting something he had said or written. This person claimed Cicero was saying one thing now but had believed something different in the past. His response: “I live from one day to the next! If something strikes me as probable, I say it; and that is how, unlike everyone else, I remain a free agent.”