t conversation you have, with your soul, and, of course, with the life you make for yourself. Not just today, but every day.
Write that on the blackboard and don't forget it.

July 13th

A LEADER LEADS

"One person, on doing well by others, immediately accounts the expected favor in return. Another is not so quick, but still considers the person a debtor and knows the favor. A third kind of person acts as if not conscious of the deed, rather like a vine producing a cluster of grapes without making further demands, like a horse after its race, or a dog after its walk, or a bee after making its honey. Such a person, having done a good deed, won’t go shouting from rooftops but simply moves on to the next deed just like the vine produces another bunch of grapes in the right season."

— MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 5.6

Have you ever heard someone else repeat one of your ideas as though it were their own? Did you ever notice a younger sibling or relative mimic your behavior, perhaps the way you dress or the music you listen to? Maybe you moved to a new neighborhood and a bunch of hipsters followed. When we are young and inexperienced, we can react negatively to these situations.

Stop copying me! I was here first!

As we mature, we start to see them in a different light. We understand that stepping up and helping is a service that leaders provide to the world. It’s our duty to do this—in big situations and small ones. If we expect to be leaders, we must see that thankless service comes with the job. We must do what leaders do, because it's what leaders do—not for the credit, not for the thanks, not for the recognition. It’s our duty.

July 14th

A LITTLE KNOWLEDGE IS DANGEROUS

"Every great power is dangerous for the beginner. You must therefore wield them as you are able, but in harmony with nature."

— EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.13.20

Great teachers are usually hardest on their most promising students. When teachers see potential, they want it to be fully realized. But great teachers are also aware that natural ability and quick comprehension can be quite dangerous to the student if left alone. Early promise can lead to overconfidence and create bad habits. Those who pick things up quickly are notorious for skipping the basic lessons and ignoring the fundamentals.

Don’t get carried away. Take it slow. Train with humility.

July 15th

DOING THE RIGHT THING IS ENOUGH

"When you’ve done well and another has benefited by it, why like a fool do you look for a third thing on top—credit for the good deed or a favor in return?"

— MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 7.73

The answer to the question “Why did you do the right thing?” should always be “Because it was the right thing to do.” After all, when you hear or see another person do that—especially when they might have endured some hardship or difficulty as a consequence for doing that right thing—do you not think, There, that is a human being at their finest? So why on earth do you need thanks or recognition for having done the right thing? It’s your job.

July 16th

PROGRESS OF THE SOUL

"To what service is my soul committed? Constantly ask yourself this and thoroughly examine yourself by seeing how you relate to that part called the ruling principle. Whose soul do I have now? Do I have that of a child, a youth... a tyrant, a pet, or a wild animal?"

— MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 5.11

To what are you committed? What cause, what mission, what purpose? What are you doing? And more importantly, why are you doing it? How does what you do every day reflect, in some way, the values you claim to care about? Are you acting in a way that’s consistent with something you value, or are you wandering, unmoored to anything other than your own ambition?

When you examine these questions, you might be uncomfortable with the answers. That's good. That means you've taken the first step to correcting your behavior—to being better than those wild creatures Marcus mentions. It also means you're closer to discovering what your duty calls you to do in life. And once you discover it, you’ve moved a little bit closer to fulfilling it.

July 17th

DON’T ABANDON OTHERS... OR YOURSELF

"As you move forward along the path of reason, people will stand in your way. They will never be able to keep you from doing what’s sound, so don’t let them knock out your goodwill for them. Keep a steady watch on both fronts, not only for well-based judgments and actions, but also for gentleness with those who would obstruct our path or create other difficulties. For getting angry is also a weakness, just as much as abandoning the task or surrendering under panic. For doing either is an equal desertion—the one by shrinking back and the other by estrangement from family and friend."

— MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 11.9

As we begin to make progress in our lives, we’ll encounter the limitations of the people around us. It’s like a diet. When everyone is eating unhealthy, there is a kind of natural alignment. But if one person starts eating healthy, suddenly there are opposing agendas. Now there's an argument about where to go for dinner.

Just as Jesus (or Christus as he would have been known to Seneca and other Roman contemporaries) endured unimaginable human suffering on the way up Via Dolorosa to the top of Calvary Hill, we must remember that forgiveness is a virtue.

Forgive them because they don't know.