TEXT:
A life is worth living.  
October 26th  
THREE PARTS, ONE AIM  

"The best and the greatest number of authors have asserted that philosophy consists of three parts: the moral, the natural, and the rational. The first puts the soul in order. The second thoroughly examines the natural order of things. The third inquires into the proper meaning of words, and their arrangements and proofs which keep falsehoods from creeping in to displace truth."  
— SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 89.9  

These three parts—the moral, the natural, and the rational—have one aim. As different as they are, they have the same purpose: to help you live a good life ruled by reason. Not in the future, but right now.  

October 27th  
WE REAP WHAT WE SOW  

"Crimes often return to their teacher."  
— SENECA, TYESTES, 311  

It is ironic that Seneca would have one of his characters utter this line. As we know, for many years Seneca served as the tutor and mentor to the emperor Nero. There is a lot of evidence that Seneca was, in fact, a positive moral influence on the deranged young man, but even at the time, Seneca's contemporaries found it strange that a philosopher would serve as the right hand to such an evil person. They even used the Greek word  
tyrannodidaskalos—  
tyrant teacher—to describe him. And just as Shakespeare observed in  
Macbeth,  
"Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return / To plague the inventor," Seneca's collaboration with Nero ultimately ended with the student murdering the teacher.  

It's something to think about when you consider whom to work with and whom to do business with in life. If you show a client how to do something unethical or illegal, might they return the favor to an unsuspecting you later on? If you provide a bad example to your employees, to your associates, to your children, might they betray you or hurt you down the road? What goes around comes around, is the saying.  

Karma is a notion we have imported from the East, along similar lines. Seneca paid a price for his instructions to Nero. As has been true throughout the ages, his hypocrisy—avoidable or not—was costly. So too will be yours.  

October 28th  
WE WERE MADE FOR EACH OTHER  

"You'll more quickly find an earthly thing kept from the earth than you will a person cut off from other human beings."  
— MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 9.9.3  

Naturally, Marcus Aurelius and the rest of the Stoics were not familiar with Newtonian physics. But they knew that what went up must come down. That's the analogy he's using here: our mutual interdependence with our fellow human beings is stronger than the law of gravity.  

Philosophy attracts introverts. The study of human nature can make you aware of other people's faults and can breed contempt for others. So do struggle and difficulty—they isolate us from the world. But none of that changes that we are, as Aristotle put it, social animals. We need each other. We must be there for each other. We must take care of each other (and to allow others to care for us in return). To pretend otherwise is to violate our nature, to be more or less than what it means to be a human being.  

October 29th  
CHARACTER IS FATE  

"Each person acquires their own character, but their official roles are designated by chance. You should invite some to your table because they are deserving, others because they may come to deserve it."  
— SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 47.15  

In the hiring process, most employers look at where someone went to school, what jobs they've held in the past. This is because past success can be an indicator of future successes. But is it always? There are plenty of people who were successful because of luck. Maybe they got into Oxford or Harvard because of their parents. And what about a young person who hasn't had time to build a track record? Are they worthless?  

Of course not. This is why  
character  
is a far better measure of a man or woman. Not just for jobs, but for friendships, relationships, for everything. Heraclitus put it as a maxim: "Character is fate."  

When you seek to advance your own position in life, character is the best lever—perhaps not in the short term, but certainly over the long term. And the same goes for the people you invite into your life.  

October 30th  
WHO GETS THE LION'S SHARE?  

"Aren't you ashamed to reserve for yourself only the remnants of your life and to dedicate to wisdom only that time can't be directed to business?"  
— SENECA, ON THE BREVITY OF LIFE, 3.5  

In one of his letters, Seneca tells a story about Alexander the Great. Apparently as Alexander was conquering the world, certain countries would offer him pieces of their territory in hopes that he'd leave them alone in exchange. Alexander would tell them, writes Seneca, that he had't come all the way to Asia to accept whatever they would give him, but instead they were going to have to accept whatever he chose to leave them.  

According to Seneca, we should treat philosophy the same way in our lives. Philosophy shouldn't have to accept what time or energy is left over from other occupations but instead we should gracefully make time for those other pursuits only once our study is finished.  

If real self-improvement is what we're after, why do we leave our reading of philosophical texts until just before bedtime? If you've gotten far from that, it's not out of some inborn corruption but from a nurturing of the wrong things and the wrong ideas. As Seneca has pointed out, philosophy is a tool to strip it all away—to get back to our true nature.  

November  
ACCEPTANCE / AMOR FATI  

November 1st  
ACCEPTING WHAT IS  

"Don't seek for everything to happen as you wish it would, but rather wish that everything happens as it actually will—then your life will flow well."  
— EPICETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 8  

"It is easy to praise providence for anything that may happen if you have two qualities: a complete view of what has actually happened in each instance and a sense of gratitude. Without gratitude what is the point of seeing, and without seeing what is the object of gratitude?"  
— EPICETUS, DISCOURSES, 1.6.1–2  

Something happened that we wish had not. Which of these is easiest to change: our opinion or the event that is past?  

The answer is obvious. Accept what happened and change your wish that it had not happened. Stoicism calls this the "art of acquiescence"—to accept rather than fight every little thing. And the most practiced Stoics take it a step further. Instead of simply  
accepting  
what happens, they urge us to actually  
enjoy  
what has happened—whatever it is. Nietzsche, many centuries later, coined the perfect expression to capture this idea:  
amor fati  
(a love of fate). It's not just accepting, it's  
loving  
everything that h