7). See orexis.

Ekpyrôsis (ἐκπύρωσις): cyclical conflagration (birth and rebirth) of the universe. This idea, central to Stoic physics and cosmology, goes back to Heraclitus (Marcus 3.3; not here). Stoics equate this fire with the all-permeating reason (logos spermatikos) of the universe (see Marcus 6.24).

Eleutheria (ἐλευθερία): freedom, liberty. The masses say that only the free can be educated, but the Stoic says that only the educated can be free (Discourses 2.1.21-22). Including the adjectival form, it appears more than one hundred times in the Discourses. Marcus uses the noun five times (see 5.9).

Eph’ hêmin (ἐφ’ ἡμῖν): what is up to us; what is in our control; our correct use of impressions, impulses, and judgments. The Enchiridion (or Handbook) of Epictetus opens with this most famous of all Stoic phrases. Epictetus says when we want something outside our control, we are stricken with anxiety (Discourses 2.13.1). Our judgments about what is up to us determine our freedom (3.26.34-35).

Epistêmê (ἐπιστήμη): certain and true knowledge, over and above that of katalêpsis.

Ethos (ἔθος): custom or habit. See also hexis. In late Stoic practice, there is a great focus on habit. Musonius Rufus’s ideas about education were aimed at addressing the upbringing, environment, and habits that vary from person to person (Lectures 1.1). Epictetus carries this focus on habit forward: "Since habit is such a powerful influence, and we’re used to pursuing our impulses to gain and avoid outside our own choice, we should set a contrary habit against that, and where appearances are really slippery, use the counterforce of our training" (Discourses 3.12.6). He also talks about the importance of using a contrary, opposing habit in 1.27.4. The term appears seventeen times in Epictetus’s Discourses. Marcus uses this term four times.

Eudaimonia (εὐδαιμονία): happiness, flourishing, well-being. Epictetus says that God made human beings to be happy and stable/serene (εὐσταθεῖν/eustathein; Discourses 3.24.2b-3). Eudaimonia appears thirteen times in the Discourses and once in the Enchiridion. Epictetus holds that it is incompatible with yearning for what we don’t have (Discourses 3.24.17). It appears twice in Marcus (7.67) in conjunction with "life," which, he says, depends on the fewest possible things (see also 7.17). Marcus has one other equivalent word in his use of εὐζωσεις/euzôêseis, or “happy in life” (3.12; none of these three reproduced here).

Eupatheia (εὐπάθεια): good passions or emotions (as contrasted with pathos), the result of correct judgments and virtuous actions.

Diogenes Laertius says, "The Stoics assert there are three good emotional states (eupatheia): joy, caution, and wishing. . . joy is rational elation. . . caution is rational avoidance. . . wishing is rational inclination. . . under wishing they place goodwill, benevolence, friendliness and affection; under caution, respect and modesty; under joy, delight, good cheer and contentment" (Lives of the Eminent Philosophers 7.116).

Hamartanô (ἁμαρτάνω): to do wrong, err, fail one’s purpose.

The verb appears twenty-eight times in Epictetus and thirty-four times in Marcus. Also, hamartia (ἁμαρτία) – fate, destiny. Stoics were compatibilists about the free will and determinism question—all things are determined, but our response is entirely our own. See pronoia.

Hexis (ἕξις): abstract noun built on echein, to have, possess; a state of mind or habit, disposition toward something; of physical things, a natural property or tendency.

Epictetus says that habits must be "first weakened and then obliterated" (Discourses 2.18.11b-14); otherwise, they become fuel for personal destruction (2.18.4-5). See ethos.

Hormê (ὁρμή): positive impulse or appetite toward an object (as a result of orexis and our assent) that leads to action; the opposite of aphormê.

These can be irrational impulses to act or a reasoned choice to act or exert effort toward an end. Quoting Epictetus, Marcus says that we "must pay special attention to the sphere of our impulses—that they are subject to reservation, to the common good (κοινωνικαί), and that they are in proportion to actual worth" (11.37). This is the second level of self-coherence that gives rise to our actions (see chart). Marcus repeatedly ties the discipline of hormê to acts for the common good (see also 8.7) and the claims of justice (4.22). It appears thirty-four times in Epictetus’s Discourses, three times in the Enchiridion, and thirty-five times in Marcus. Seneca uses the Latin equivalent impetus seventy-nine times in his letters (see Moral Letters 71.32, where he says virtue resides in our judgment, which gives rise to impulse and clarifies all appearances that give rise to impulse).

Hulê (ὕλη): matter, material.

This is a very common reference in Epictetus, appearing more than forty times, usually with the analogy of the material that craftsmen use as a way of talking about where our own focus should be, and where the evidence of our progress will be seen in the art of living (Discourses 1.15.2). He calls external things the raw material of our prohairesis (1.29.1-4a); elsewhere he says, "The raw material for the work of a good and excellent person is their own guiding reason (hêgemonikon)" (3.3.1). The term appears nineteen times in Marcus; see especially 8.35, where he talks about how we can "convert any obstacle into the raw material for our own purpose." Sometimes used interchangeably with ousia.

Hypolêpsis (ὑπολήψις): literally “taking up” an opinion, assumption, conception, notion, understanding.

Hadot translates the term as “value judgment” and sees a movement upward into higher-level value judgments, from prolêpsis to hypolêpsis to katalêpsis. See Marcus 4.3.4b and 9.13, where he talks about how our own assumptions can crush us