The lifespan of a human being is 122 years. The average life expectancy in the United States is a little over seventy-eight years. In other countries, in other eras, it has been more and it has been less. But in the end, we all succumb, as Marcus said, to the rhythm of events—which is always a final, determined beat. There is no need to dwell on this fact, but there is no point in ignoring it either.

December 13th

IT'S JUST A NUMBER
“You aren’t bothered, are you, because you weigh a certain amount and not twice as much? So why get worked up that you’ve been given a certain lifespan and not more? Just as you are satisfied with your normal weight, so should you be with the time you’ve been given.”
—
MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 6.49

They say age is just a number, but to some people it's a very important one—otherwise, women wouldn't lie about being younger, and ambitious young men wouldn't lie about being older. Rich people and health nuts spend billions of dollars in an effort to move the expiration date from around seventy-eight years to hopefully forever.

The number of years we manage to eke out doesn’t matter, only what those years are composed of. Seneca put it best when he said, “Life is long if you know how to use it.” Sadly, most people don't—they waste the life they've been given. Only when it is too late do they try to compensate for that waste by vainly hoping to put more time on the clock.

Use today. Use every day. Make yourself satisfied with what you have been given.

December 14th

WHAT WE SHOULD KNOW BY THE END
“Soon you will die, and still you aren’t sincere, undisturbed, or free from suspicion that external things can harm you, nor are you gracious to all, knowing that wisdom and acting justly are one and the same.”
—
MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 4.37

From what we understand, Marcus wrote many of his meditations later in life, when he was suffering from serious illnesses. So when he says, “Soon you will die,” he was speaking frankly to himself about his own mortality. How scary that must have been. He was staring at the real possibility of death and not liking what he saw in these last minutes.

Sure, he'd accomplished many things in his life, but his emotions were still the cause of discomfort, pain, and frustration. He knew that with his limited time left, better choices would provide relief. Hopefully, you have a lot more time left—but that makes it even more important to make headway while you still can. We are unfinished products up until the end, as Marcus knew very well. But the earlier we learn it, the more we can enjoy the fruits of the labor on our character—and the sooner we can be free (or freer) of insincerity, anxiety, ungraciousness, and un-Stoic-ness.

December 15th

A SIMPLE WAY TO MEASURE OUR DAYS
“This is the mark of perfection of character—to spend each day as if it were your last, without frenzy, laziness, or any pretending.”
—
MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 7.69

The Stoics didn't think that anyone could be perfect. The idea of becoming a sage—the highest aspiration of a philosopher—wasn’t realistic. This was just their Platonic ideal.

Still, they started every day hoping to get a little closer to that mark. There was much to gain in the trying. Can you actually live today like it is your last day? Is it even possible to embody completeness or perfection in our ethos (character), effortlessly doing the right thing for a full twenty-four hours? Is it possible for more than a minute?

Maybe not. But if trying was enough for the Stoics, it should be enough for us too.

December 16th

EVERLASTING GOOD HEALTH
“I tell you, you only have to learn to live like the healthy person does... living with complete confidence. What confidence? The only one worth holding, in what is trustworthy, unhindered, and can’t be taken away—your own reasoned choice.”
— EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.26.23-24

The Stoics say repeatedly that it’s dangerous to have faith in what you do not control. But your own reasoned choice? Well, for now that is in your control. Therefore it is one of the few things you can have confidence in. It’s the only area of health that can’t suddenly be given a terminal diagnosis (except for the one we all get the day we’re born). It’s the only one that remains pristine and never wears down—it’s only the user who quits it; never will it quit the user.

In this passage, Epictetus points out that slaves and workers and philosophers alike can live this way. Socrates, Diogenes, and Cleanthes lived this way—even while they had families and while they were struggling students.

And so can you.

December 17th

KNOW THYSELF—BEFORE IT'S TOO LATE
“Death lies heavy upon one who, known exceedingly well by all, dies unknown to himself.”
— SENECA, THEYS ESTES, 400

Some of the world’s greatest minds have warned us that the best way to live a life worth living is to find your true self. But how can we do this when we are so often influenced by society and our environment? We must take responsibility for who we are and what we want our lives to be.

December 18th

WHAT COMES TO US ALL
“Both Alexander the Great and his mule-keeper were both brought to the same place by death—either received into the all-generative reason, or scattered among the atoms.”
— MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 6.24

In a world that is in many ways becoming more and more unequal, there aren’t many truly equalitarian experiences left. When Benjamin Franklin observed that “in this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes,” he couldn’t have known how good some people would get at avoiding their taxes. But death? That’s still the one thing that everyone experiences.

We all face the same end. Whether you conquer the known world or shine the shoes of the people who do, at the end death will be a radical equalizer—a lesson in abject humility. Shakespeare had Hamlet trace out the logic in stark terms for both Alexander and Julius Caesar:

Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away:
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe,
Should patch a wall to expel the winter flaw!

The next time you feel yourself getting high and mighty—or conversely, feeling low and inferior—just remember, we all end up the same way. In death, no one is better, no one is worse. All our stories have the same finale.

December 19th

HUMAN SCALE
“Think of the whole universe of matter and how small your share. Think about the expanse of time and how brief—almost momentary—the part marked for you. Think of the workings of fate and how infinitesimal your role.”
— MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 5.24

The amount of matter in the universe is immense—on the order of trillions of atoms. What percentage of that matter does one human body constitute?

The earth, as far as science tells us, is some 4.5 billion years old and shows no sign of ending soon. Our time on the earth, on the other hand, will be what? Several decades, maybe?

Sometimes we need to have the facts and figures spelled out in front of us to fully realize the scale at which humans happen to exist in the big scheme of things.

Consider this the next time you feel self-important, or like everything rises and falls on what you do next. It doesn’t. You’re just one person among many, doing your best among many. That’s all you need to do.

December 20th

FEAR THE FEAR OF DEATH
“Do you then ponder how the supreme of human evils, the surest mark of the base and cowardly, is not death, but the fear of death? I urge”