TEXT:
Good time there. He focused on his recovery with real enthusiasm. "I suddenly found it wonderful, strange, and beautiful, to be sober." It was as if a veil, or scum, or film had been stripped from all things visual and auditory." It’s an experience shared by many addicts when they finally stop doing things their way and actually open themselves to the perspectives and wisdom and lessons of those who have gone before them.

There is no promise that trying things this way—of grabbing the different handle—will have such momentous results for you. But why continue to lift by the handle that hasn’t worked? June 15th LISTENING ACCOMPLISHES MORE THAN SPEAKING "To the youngster talking nonsense Zeno said, 'The reason why we have two ears and only one mouth is so we might listen more and talk less.'" – Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, 7.1.23 Why do the wise have so few problems compared with the rest of us? There are a few simple reasons.

First, the wise seem to manage expectations as much as possible. They rarely expect what is not possible in the first place.

Second, the wise always consider both the best and worst case scenarios. They don’t just think about what they wish to happen, but also what very realistically can happen if things were to suddenly turn.

Third, the wise act with a reverse clause—meaning that they not only consider what might go wrong, but they are prepared for that to be exactly what they want to happen—it is an opportunity for excellence and virtue.

And if you follow it today, you too will find that nothing surprises you or happens contrary to your expectations. June 16th NO SHAME IN NEEDING HELP "Don’t be ashamed of needing help. You have a duty to fulfill just like a soldier on the wall of battle. So what if you are in injured and can’t climb up without another soldier’s help?" – Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 7.7 One ever said you were born with all the tools you’d need to solve every problem you’d face in life. In fact, as a newborn you were practically helpless. Someone helped you then, and you came to understand that you could ask for that help. It was how you knew you were loved.

Well, you are still loved. You can ask anyone for help. You don’t have to face everything on your own. If you need help, comrade, just ask. June 17th OFFENSE OR DEFENSE? "Fortune doesn’t have the long reach we suppose, she can only lay siege to those who hold her tight. So, let’s step back from her as much as possible." – Seneca, Moral Letters, 82.5achiavelli, who supposedly admired Seneca, says in The Prince that "fortune is a woman, and it is necessary, in order to keep her down, to beat her and struggle with her." Even for the sixteenth century, it’s pretty horrifying imagery. But for a ruthless and endlessly ambitious ruler, it was par for the course. Is that the nasty lifestyle you’re after?

Now compare that view with Seneca’s. Not only is he saying that the more you struggle with fortune, the more vulnerable you are to it, but he’s also saying that the better path to security is in the "impregnable wall" of philosophy. "Philosophy," he says, helps us tame the "mad frenzy of our greed and tamps down the fury of our fears."

In sports or war, the metaphor here would be the choice between a strategy of endless, exhausting offense and a strategy of resilient, flexible defense. Which will you play? What kind of person are you? Only you can answer that question. But you would be remiss not to consider the ultimate end of most of the princes in Machiavelli’s book—and how few of them died happily in bed, surrounded by their loved ones.

June 18th PREPARED AND ACTIVE "Let Fate find us prepared and active. Here is the great soul—the one who surrenders to Fate. The opposite is the weak and degenerate one, who struggles with and has a poor regard for the order of the world, and seeks to correct the faults of the gods rather than their own." – Seneca, Moral Letters, 107.12 Whatever happens today, let it find us prepared and active: ready for problems, ready for difficulties, ready for people to behave in disappointing or confusing ways, ready to accept and make it work for us. Let’s not wish we could turn back time or remake the universe according to our preference. Not when it would be far better and far easier to remake ourselves.

June 19th STAY FOCUSED ON THE PRESENT "Don’t let your reflection on the whole sweep of life crush you. Don’t fill your mind with all the bad things that might still happen. Stay focused on the present situation and ask yourself why it’s so unbearable and can’t be survived." – Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 8.36 When you look back at some of the most impressive, even scary, things that you’ve done or endured, how were they possible? How were you able to see past the danger or the poor odds? As Marcus described, you were too busy with the details to let the whole sweep of the situation crush you. In fact, you probably didn’t even think about it at the time.

A character in Chuck Palahniuk’s novel Lullaby says, "We should take wandering outdoor walks, so that the mind might be nourished and refreshed by the open air and deep breathing." – Seneca, On Tranquility of Mind, 17.8 In a notably loud city like Rome, it was impossible to get much peace and quiet. The noises of wagons, the shouting of vendors, the hammering of a blacksmith—all filled the streets with piercing violence (to say nothing of the putrid smells of a city with poor sewage and sanitation). So philosophers went on a lot of walks—to get where they needed to go, to clear their heads, to get fresh air.

Throughout the ages, philosophers, writers, poets, and thinkers have found that walking offers an additional benefit—time and space for better work. As Nietzsche would later say: "It is only ideas gained from walking that have any worth."

Today, make sure you take a walk. And in the future, when you get stressed or overwhelmed, take a walk. When you have a tough problem to solve or a decision to make, take a walk. When you want to be creative, take a walk. When you need to get some air, take a walk. When you have a phone call to make, take a walk. When you need to think, take a walk.