TEXT:
So many responsibilities were immense. It's so easy to complain about this or that, or to try to make excuses and justifications for the things you've done. But that doesn't accomplish anything—and it never lightens the load.
November 14th
YOU CHOOSE THE OUTCOME
"He was sent to prison. But the observation 'he has suffered evil,' is an addition coming from you."
—
EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.8.5b–6a
This is classic Stoic thinking, as you’ve gathered by now. An event itself is objective. How we describe it—that it was unfair, or it's a great calamity, or that they did it on purpose—is on us.
Malcolm X (then Malcolm Little) went into prison a criminal, but he left as an educated, religious, and motivated man who would help in the struggle for civil rights. Did he suffer an evil? Or did he choose to make his experience a positive one?
Acceptance isn’t passive. It’s the first step in an active process toward self-improvement.
November 15th
EVERYTHING IS CHANGE
"Meditate often on the swiftness with which all that exists and is coming into being is swept by us and carried away. For substance is like a river's unending flow, its activities continually changing and causes infinitely shifting so that almost nothing at all stands still."
—
MARcus AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 5.23
Aurelius borrows this wonderful metaphor from Heraclitus, who said, "No man steps in the same river twice." Because the river has changed, and so has the man.
Life is in a constant state of change. And so are we. To get upset by things is to wrongly assume that they will last. To kick ourselves or blame others is grabbing at the wind. To resent change is to wrongly assume that you have a choice in the matter.
Everything is change. Embrace that. Flow with it.
November 16th
HOPE AND FEAR ARE THE SAME
"Hecato says, 'Cease to hope and you will cease to fear.' ... The primary cause of both these ills is that instead of adapting ourselves to present circumstances we send out thoughts too far ahead."
—
SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 5.7b–8
Hope is generally regarded as good. Fear is generally regarded as bad. To a Stoic like Hecato (known as Hecato of Rhodes), they are the same—both are projections into the future about things we do not control. Both are the enemy of this present moment that you are actually in. Both mean you’re living a life in opposition to amor fati.
It’s not about overcoming our fears but understanding that both hope and fear contain a dangerous amount of want and worry in them. And, sadly, the want is what causes the worry.
November 17th
JUDGE NOT, LEST . . .
"When philosophy is wielded with arrogance and stubbornly, it is the cause for the ruin of many. Let philosophy scrape off your own faults, rather than be a way to rail against the faults of others."
—
SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 103.4b–5a
Remember, the proper direction of philosophy—of all the things we’re doing here—is focused inward. To make ourselves better and to leave other people to that task for themselves and their own journey. Our faults are in our control, and so we turn to philosophy to help scrape them off like barnacles from the hull of a ship. Other people’s faults? Not so much. That’s for them to do.
Leave other people to their faults. Nothing in Stoic philosophy empowers you to judge them—only to accept them. Especially when we have so many of our own.
November 18th
FOUR HABITS OF THE STOIC MIND
"Our rational nature moves freely forward in its impressions when it:
1) accepts nothing false or uncertain;
2) directs its impulses only to acts for the common good;
3) limits its desires and aversions only to what’s in its own power;
4) embraces everything nature assigns it."
—
MARcus AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 8.7f
You notice, Marcus repeatedly reminds himself what Stoicism is. These bullet points are helpful to those of us reading thousands of years later, but really they were intended to be helpful to him. Maybe that day he had accepted a bad impression or had acted selfishly. Maybe he had pinned his hopes on something outside his control or complained and fought against something that had happened. Or maybe it had just been a while since he’d thought about these things and wanted a reminder.
Whatever his case was, or whatever ours is today, let’s align our minds along these four critical habits:
1. Accept only what is true.
2. Work for the common good.
3. Match our needs and wants with what is in our control.
4. Embrace what nature has in store for us.
November 19th
MAXIMS FROM THREE WISE MEN
"For any challenge we should hold three thoughts:
1) Everything that happens is related to everything else;
2) All things pass away;
3) The beginning, the middle, and the end are one."
—
PLUTARCH, ON THE ELEVEN FALSIBLES
Let’s practice this perspective today. Pretend that each event—whether desired or unexpected—was willed to happen, willed specifically for you. You wouldn’t fight that, would you?
November 20th
BEHOLD, NOW AS EVER
"If you’ve seen the present, you’ve seen all things, from time immemorial into all of eternity. For everything that happens is related and the same."
—
MARcus AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 6.37
The events that will transpire today are the same as the things that have always occurred. People living and dying, animals living and dying, clouds rolling in and rolling out, air sucked in and sucked out, as it has for aeons. This moment right now, to paraphrase Emerson, is a quotation of the moments that have come before and will come ever after.
This idea is expressed nowhere more beautifully than in the Christianity hymn Gloria Patri: "As it was in the beginning, and now, and always, and to the ages of ages." This thought is not supposed to be depressing or uplifting. It’s just a fact. However, it can have a calming, centering effect. No need to get excited, no need to wait on pins and needles. If you haven’t seen this before, someone else has. That can be a relief.
November 21st
ONCE IS ENOUGH, ONCE IS FOREVER
"A good isn't increased by the addition of time, but if one is wise for even a moment, they will be no less happy than the person who exercises virtue for all time and happily passes their life in it."
—
CHRYSIPPUS QUOTED BY PLUTARCH IN MORALIA: "AGAINST THE STOICS ON COMMON CONCEPTIONS," 1062 (LÖEB, P. 682)
Perhaps wisdom and happiness are like winning a medal in the Olympics. It doesn’t matter whether you won a hundred years ago or ten minutes ago, or whether you won just once or in multiple events. It doesn’t matter whether someone beats your time or score down the road, and it doesn’t matter whether you never compete again. You’ll always be a medalist, and you’ll always know what it feels like. No one can take that away—and it would be impossible to feel more of that feeling.
The Juilliard-trained actor Evan Handler, who not only survived acute myeloid leukemia but also severe depression, has talked about his decision to take antidepressants, which he did for a deliberately brief time. He took them because he wanted to know what true, normal happiness feels like.