TEXT:
aren’t.
Use this knowledge to be gentle and gracious. 
July 20th
MADE FOR JUSTICE
"The unjust person acts against the gods. For insofar as the nature of the universe made rational creatures for the sake of each other, with an eye toward mutual benefit based on true value and never for harm, anyone breaking nature’s will obviously acts against the oldest of gods."
—
MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 9.1.1
We say of the most heinous acts that they are crimes against nature. We consider certain things to be an affront against humanity, saying, "This violates everything we hold dear." However much we differ in religion, upbringing, politics, class, or gender, we can come together in agreement there.
Why? Because our sense of justice goes marrow deep. We don’t like it when people cut in line; we don’t like freeloaders; we pass laws that protect the defenseless; and we pay our taxes, agreeing, in part, to redistribute our wealth to those in need. At the same time, if we think we can get away with it, we might try to cheat or bend the rules. To paraphrase Bill Walsh, when left to our own devices, many of us individuals seek lower ground like water.
The key, then, is to support our natural inclination to justice with strong boundaries and strong commitments—to embrace, as Lincoln urged a divided, angry nation to do, "the better angels of our nature."
July 21st
MADE FOR WORKING TOGETHER
"Whenever you have trouble getting up in the morning, remind yourself that you’ve been made by nature for the purpose of working with others, whereas even unthinking animals share sleeping. And it’s our own natural purpose that is more fitting and more satisfying."
—
MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 8.12
If a dog spends all day in bed — your bed, most likely — that’s fine. It’s just being a dog. It doesn’t have anywhere to be, no other obligation other than being itself. According to the Stoics, we humans have a higher obligation — not to the gods but to each other. What gets us out of bed each morning — even when we fight it like Marcus did — is
praxeis koinonikas apodidonai
(to render works held in common).
Civilization and country are great projects we build together and have been building together with our ancestors for millennia. We are made for cooperation (
synergia
) with each other.
So if you need an extra boost to get out of bed this morning, if you need something more than caffeine can offer, use this. People are depending on you. Your purpose is to help us render this great work together. And we’re waiting and excited for you to show up.
July 22nd
NO ONE HAS A GUN TO YOUR HEAD
"Nothing is noble if it’s done unwillingly or under compulsion. Every noble deed is voluntary."
—
SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 66.16
But don’t have to do the right thing. You always have the option to be selfish, rude, awful, shortsighted, pedantic, evil, or stupid. In fact, sometimes there are incentives to break bad.
Certainly, not every criminal gets caught.
But how does this line of thinking usually work out for people? What’s that life like?
You don’t have to do the right thing, just as you don’t have to do your duty. You get to. You want to.
July 23rd
RECEIVE HONORS AND SLIGHTS EXACTLY THE SAME WAY
"Receive without pride, let go without attachment."
—
MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 8.33
In the midst of the breakdown of the Roman Republic, during the civil war between Pompey and Caesar, Pompey made the decision to give control of the military fleet to Cato. It was a massive honor and hugely powerful position. But then a few days later, responding to the protests of his jealous inner circle, Pompey reversed his decision and took the command away.
It could have been seen as an enormous public humiliation—to be given a promotion and then have it taken away. The record shows that Cato’s reaction was basically nothing. He responded to the honor and the dishonor the same way: with indifference and acceptance. He certainly didn’t let it affect his support for the cause. In fact, after the snub, he worked to rally the soldiers before battle with inspirational speeches—the very men who should have been under his command.
That’s what Marcus is saying. Do not take the slights of the day personally—or the exciting rewards and recognitions either, especially when duty has assigned you an important cause. Trivial details like the rise and fall of your position say nothing about you as a person. Only your behavior—as Cato’s did—will.
July 24th
SOMEWHERE SOMEONE’S DYING
"Whenever disturbing news is delivered to you, bear in mind that no news can ever be relevant to your reasoned choice. Can anyone break news to you that your assumptions or desires are wrong? No way! But they can tell you someone died—even so, what is that to you?"
—
EPICETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.18.1–2
A well-meaning friend might ask you today: "What do you think about [insert tragedy from the other side of the world]?" You, in your equally well-meaning concern, might say, "I just feel awful about it."
In this scenario, both of you have put aside your reasoned choice to work together for yourselves and your families. And while it's okay to be touched by others' pain, we must also remember that our own choices are what truly matter.
July 25th
WHAT’S ON YOUR TOMBSTONE?
"When you see someone often flashing their rank or position, or someone whose name is often bandied about in public, don’t be envious; such things are bought at the expense of life. . . .
Some die on the first rungs of the ladder of success, others before they can reach the top, and the few that make it to the top of their ambition through a thousand indignities realize at the end it’s only for an inscription on their gravestone."
—
SENECA, ON THE BREVITY OF LIFE, 20
Sometimes our professional commitments can become an end unto themselves. A politician might justify the neglect of his family for his office, or a writer might believe her "genius" excuses antisocial or selfish behavior. Anyone with some perspective can see that, in fact, the politician is really just in love with fame, and the writer enjoys being condescending and feeling superior. Workaholics always make excuses for their selfishness.
While these attitudes can lead to impressive accomplishments, their cost is rarely justified. The ability to work hard and long is admirable. But you are a human
being, not a human
doing.
Seneca points out that we’re not animals. "Is it really so pleasant to die in harness?" he asked. Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn put it better: "Work is what horses die of. Everybody should know that."
July 26th
WHEN GOOD MEN DO NOT NOTHING
"Often injustice lies in what you aren’t doing, not only in what you are doing."
—
MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 9.5
History abounds with evidence that humanity is capable of doing evil, not only actively but passively. In some of our most shameful moments—from slavery to the Holocaust to segregation to the murder of Kitty Genovese—guilt wasn’t limited to perpetrators but to ordinary citizens who, for a multitude of reasons, declined to get involved. It’s that old line: all evil needs to prevail is for good men to do nothing.
It’s not enough to just
not
do evil. You must also be a force for good in the world, as best you can.
July 27th
WHERE IS ANYTHING BETTER?
"Indeed, if you find anything in human life better than justice, truth, self-control, courage—in short, anything better than the sufficiency of your own mind—consider yourself fortunate."
—
MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 9.6
There is no greater wealth than contentment with what we have. And there is no greater treasure than a clear conscience.
So go out and live wisely. And remember that even in the darkest of times, there is always hope for a brighter tomorrow.