TEXT:
To be able to handle them if you’ve burned the candle at both ends? If you’ve been abusing and overworking your body?

December 26th

LIFE IS LONG—IF YOU KNOW HOW TO USE IT

“It’s not at all that we have too short a time to live, but that we squander a great deal of it. Life is long enough, and it’s given in sufficient measure to do many great things if we spend it well. But when it’s poured down the drain of luxury and neglect, when it’s employed to no good end, we’re finally driven to see that it has passed by before we even recognized it passing. And so it is—we don’t receive a short life, we make it so.”
—

Seneca, On the Brevity of Life, 1.3–4

If one knows how long they have to live, but sadly, we can be sure of one thing: we’ll waste far too much of life. Waste it sitting around, waste it chasing the wrong things, waste it by refusing to take the time to ask ourselves what’s actually important to us. Far too often, we’re like the overconfident academics that Petrarch criticized in his classic essay on ignorance—the types who “fritter away their powers incessantly in caring for things outside of them and seek themselves there.” Yet they have no idea this is what they’re doing.

So today, if you find yourself rushed or uttering the words “I just don’t have enough time,” stop and take a second. Is this actually true? Or have you just committed to a lot of unnecessary things? Are you actually being efficient, or have you assumed a great deal of waste into your life? The average American spends something like forty hours a year in traffic. That’s months over the course of a life. And for “traffic,” you can substitute so many activities—from fighting with others to watching television to daydreaming.

Your life is plenty long—just use it properly.

December 27th

DON’T LET YOUR SOUL GO FIRST

“It’s a disgrace in this life when the soul surrenders first while the body refuses to.”

—

Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 6.29

Despite his privileges, Marcus Aurelius had a difficult life. The Roman historian Cassius Dio mused that Marcus “did not meet with the good fortune that he deserved, for he was not strong in body and was involved in a multitude of troubles throughout practically his entire reign.” At one point, he was so sick that a rumor spread that he had died—and matters were made worse when his most trusted general used it as an opportunity to declare himself the new emperor.

But throughout these struggles—the years at war, the crippling illnesses, his troubled son—he never gave up. It’s an inspiring example for us to think about today if we get tired, frustrated, or have to deal with some crisis. Here was a guy who had every reason to be angry and bitter, who could have abandoned his principles and lived in luxury or ease, who could have put his responsibilities aside and focused on his own health.

But he never did. His soul stayed strong even after his body became weak. He didn’t give up, right up to the second until his body finally did—when he died near Vienna in 180 AD.

December 28th

ON BEING REMEMBERED

“Everything lasts for a day, the one who remembers and the remembered.”

—

Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 4.35

Take a walk down Forty-first Street toward the beautiful New York City Public Library, with its majestic stone lions. On your way up “Library Way,” you’ll pass a gold placard laid into the cement, part of a series of quotations from great writers throughout history. This one is from Marcus Aurelius:

“Everything is only for a day, both that which remembers and that which is remembered.”

The library itself was designed by the firm of John Merven Carrère, one of the twentieth century’s most accomplished architects. It combines the collections of such luminaries and philanthropists as Samuel Tilden, John Jacob Astor, and James Lenox, and their names are carved into the stone. Today, the naming rights go to hedge fund manager Stephen A. Schwarzman. The opening of the library in 1911 was attended by President William Howard Taft, Governor John Alden Dix, and New York City mayor William Jay Gaynor. The plaques you pass on your way were designed by the excellent Gregg LeFevre.

Marcus’s quote makes us ponder: How many of these people have we even heard of? The people involved in the story of the library were some of the most famous men in the world, masters of their respective crafts, rich beyond imagination in some cases. Even along “Library Way,” many of the famous authors are unfamiliar to the modern reader. They are all long gone, as are the people who remembered them.

All of us, including Marcus—who is passed over by just as many unaware pedestrians—last for just a day, at most.

December 29th

GIVE THANKS

“In all things we should try to make ourselves be as grateful as possible. For gratitude is a good thing for ourselves, in a manner in which justice, commonly held to belong to others, is not. Gratitude pays it self back in large measure.”

—

Seneca, Moral Letters, 81.19

Think of all the things you can be grateful for today. That you are alive, that you have food and shelter, that you have loved ones around you. Be grateful for small things like a good book or a cup of coffee. Be grateful for big things like a great job or a beautiful home.

And don’t just think about gratitude once in a while. Make it a daily practice. If you kick off every day with a sense of gratitude, your life will be much better.

December 30th

TAKING THE BITE OUT OF IT

“To bear trials with a calm mind robs misfortune of its strength and burden.”

—

Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus, 231–232

The people you admire, the ones who seem to be able to successfully handle and deal with adversity and difficulty, what do they have in common? Their sense of equilibrium, their orderly discipline. On the one-yard line, amidst criticism, after a heartbreaking tragedy, during a stressful period, they keep going.

Not because they’re better than you. Not because they’re smarter. But because they have learned a little secret. You can take the bite out of any tough situation by bringing a calm mind to it. By considering it and meditating on it in advance.

And this is true not just for our day-to-day adversities but for the greatest and most unavoidable trial of all: our own eventual death. It could come tomorrow, it could come in forty years. It could be quick and painless, or it could be excruciating. Our greatest asset in that ordeal will not be religion, it will not even be the wise words of the philosophers. It will be, simply, our calm and reasoned mind.

December 31st

GET ACTIVE IN YOUR OWN RESCUE

“Stop wandering about! You aren’t likely to read your own notebooks, or ancient histories, or the anthologies you’ve collected to enjoy in your old age. Get busy with life’s purpose, toss aside empty hopes, get active in your own rescue—if you care for yourself at all—and do it while you can.”

—

Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 3.14

The purpose of all our reading and studying is to aid us in the pursuit of the good life (and death). At some point, we must put our books aside and take action. So that, as Seneca put it, the “words become works.” There is an old saying that a “scholar made is a soldier spoiled.” We want to be both scholars and soldiers—soldiers in the good fight.

That’s what’s next for you. Move forward, move onward. Another book isn’t the answer. The right choices and decisions are. Who knows how much time you have left, or what awaits us tomorrow?

W

STAYING STOIC

I hope this book has lasted you a year (though we won’t fault you if you read through it without regard to the date. In fact, we’d be flattered). So what’s next? We hope that you get involved with Stoicism and make it a daily practice. Read more books on the subject, talk to other Stoics, and live your life according to the principles of reason, self-control, and virtue.

May you have a long and fulfilling year ahead. Remember to be kind, compassionate, and grateful. And above all, be true to yourself.