The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts. Repair it into clean, readable English. Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
Of virtue in 3.1.6b –9, where his use of σωφροσύνη is milder in the “even-tempered” sense (contrasted by him with “undisciplined”), and his preferred term for self-control here (and elsewhere, appearing with wisdom/φρονίμῳ in 2.21.9) is ἐγκρατεῖς / egkrateis/mastery, or exercising control over (contrasted with ἀκρατεῖς / akrateis / uncontrolled). Seneca uses the Latin virtus and says that “virtue is the only good” and is nothing less than “true and steadfast judgment” (Moral Letters 7.32).

Askēsis (ἄσκησις): exercise, practice, disciplined training designed to achieve virtue.

Epictetus sees three areas of training (Discourses 3.2.1 –3a, 3.12.8)—the famous doctrine of three topics (topoi) that scholars think was Epictetus’s unique contribution to late Stoicism (see Long’s Epictetus: A Stoic and Socratic Guide to Life, pp. 112–118; Hadot’s The Inner Citadel, pp. 89–100). Before Epictetus, Seneca affirms the long-standing Stoic division of philosophy into three parts, which he calls “the moral, the natural, and the rational” (Moral Letters 89.9). We argue that Epictetus also sees three levels of discipline, moving from learning/study (μανθάνω / manthanô, appearing seventy-nine times) to practice (μελετάω / meletaô, appearing fifty-four times; see Discourses 2.19.29 –34, where he says “learn and diligently practice”) to more rigorous training (ἀσκέω/ἄσκησις, appearing forty times). For the three levels of discipline, see 2.9.13 –14. For Epictetus, the exercise and training analogies run from wrestling and athletics (see the “invincible athlete” in 1.18.21 –23; “true athlete in rigorous training” in 2.18.27 –2), to the pankration (3.10.6 –7), and the ultimate “hard winter training” (χειμασκησαι / cheimaskêsai) of soldiers (1.2.32, 4.8.35–37).

While each of these three areas of training and three levels of discipline reach into and inform one another, there is a clear sense of hierarchy in the acts of the soul, moving up from desire through action to assent, and of making forward progress in our actions in the world, from study to practice to hard training, toward virtue (see chart). For Marcus, who is often derisive of mere study, books, and displays of learning (2.2, 3.14, 5.5, 5.9), these words scarcely appear. He seems more interested in simply getting straight to putting things to the test in everyday life by following the dictates of our guiding reason (hêgemonikon). In this way he is very much in tune with Epictetus’s memorable admonition against spouting what you’ve learned without having digested it (see Discourses 3.21.1 –3). For Marcus, the point of it all is to use our reason to produce in the world actions that are good, just, and virtuous.

Dogma (δόγμα): that which seems to one; opinion or belief; philosophically, dogmata are principles or judgments established by reason and experience. Haines notes that “what the sensations are to the body and impulses to the soul, dogmata are to the intelligence.” Epictetus takes aim at the untested form of dogmata by framing them as τὰ πονηρὰ δόγματα, or oppressive or worthless opinions that must be rooted out by our reasoned choice (Discourses 3.3.18–19; see also 3.19.2 –3) before they destroy our inner fortress (4.1.86). The term appears more than one hundred times in Epictetus (see Enchiridion 5, where he says that it’s not things that disturb us, but our judgments/dogmata about them) and twenty-three times in Marcus (see especially 4.49, 7.2, 8.1, 8.22, and 8.47, where he often talks about straightening out your principles).

Dokimazein (δοκιμάζω): to assay; to put to the test; to thoroughly examine. This is a key verb in understanding Epictetus’s Stoicism (found ten times in the Discourses and once in the opening of the Enchiridion), but it was not used by Marcus. The word carries the meaning of the assayer, one who tests fine metals and coins to verify their authenticity. In one of the most memorable passages in Epictetus, he compares our need to test impressions to what is done with coins and how the skilled merchant can hear a counterfeit coin cast upon a table just as a musician would detect a sour note (Discourses 1.2.7–11ff). See also the exercises he gives for handling impressions (Discourses 2.18.24; Enchiridion 1.5).

Doxa (δόξα): belief, opinion. Ekklisis (ἔκκλισις): aversion; inclination away from a thing. The opposite of, but often appearing with orexis. This is the first level of self-coherence (see chart). Epictetus warns repeatedly that with aversions we must be careful to apply them only to our own concerns and not to those controlled by others (see Discourses 4.1.81–82ff; not here). The word appears fifty-three times in the Discourses. In a vivid metaphor of a sparring match, Marcus tells us we can avoid people who might have ill intent without being suspicious toward them (6.20). In step with Epictetus, Marcus urges us to limit our aversion to only those things in our power (8.