March 4th

AWARENESS IS FREEDOM  
"The person is free who lives as they wish, neither compelled, nor hindered, nor limited—whose choices aren’t hampered, whose desires succeed, and who don’t fall into what repels them. Who wishes to live in deception—tripped up, mistaken, undisciplined, complaining, in a rut? No one. These are base people who don’t live as they wish; and so, no base person is free."

—

EPICETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.1.1–3

It is sad to consider how much time many people spend in the course of a day doing things they "have" to do—not necessary obligations like work or family, but the obligations we needlessly accept out of vanity or ignorance. Consider the actions we take in order to impress other people or the lengths we’ll go to fulfill urges or sate desires we don’t even question. In one of his famous letters, Seneca observes how often powerful people are slaves to their money, to their positions, to their mistresses, even—as was legal in Rome—to their slaves. "No slavery is more disgraceful," he quipped, "than one which is self-imposed."

We see this slavery all the time—a codependent person who can’t help but clean up after a dysfunctional friend, a boss who micromanages employees and sweats every penny. The countless causes, events, and get-togethers we’re too busy to attend but agree to anyway.

Take an inventory of your obligations from time to time. How many of these are self-imposed? How many of them are truly necessary? Are you as free as you think?

March 5th

CUTTING BACK ON THE COSTLY  
"So, concerning the things we pursue, and for which we vigorously exert ourselves, we owe this consideration—either there is nothing useful in them, or most aren’t useful. Some of them are superfluous, while others aren’t worth that much. But we don’t discern this and see them as free, when they cost us dearly."

—

SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 42.6

Seneca’s many letters, this is probably one of the most important—and one of the least understood. He’s making a point that goes unheard in a society of ever-bigger houses and ever more possessions: that there’s a hidden cost to all that accumulating. And the sooner we’re aware of it, the better.

Remember: even what we get for free has a cost, if only in what we pay to store it—in our garages and in our minds. As you walk past your possessions today, ask yourself:

Do I need this? Is it superfluous? What’s this actually worth? What is it costing me?

You might be surprised by the answers and how much we’ve been paying without even knowing it.

March 6th

DON’T TELL YOURSELF STORIES  
"In public avoid talking often and excessively about your accomplishments and dangers, for however much you enjoy recounting your dangers, it’s not so pleasant for others to hear about your affairs."

—

EPICETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 33.14  

Modern philosopher Nassim Taleb has warned of the "narrative fallacy"—the tendency to assemble unrelated events of the past into stories. These stories, however gratifying to create, are inherently misleading. They lead to a sense of cohesion and certainty that isn’t real.

If that’s too heady, remember that as Epictetus points out, there is another reason not to tell stories about your past. It’s boring, annoying, and self-absorbed. It might make you feel good to dominate the conversation and make it all about you, but how do you think it is for everyone else? Do you think people are really enjoying the highlights of your high school football days? Is this really the time for another exaggerated tale of your sexual prowess?

Try your best not to create this fantasy bubble—live in what’s real. Listen and connect with people, don’t perform for them.

March 7th

DON’T TRUST THE SENSES  
"Heraclitus called self-deception an awful disease and eyesight a lying sense."

—

DIODORUS LAERTIUS, LIVES OF THE EMINENT PHILOSOPHERS, 9.7  

Self-awareness is the ability to objectively evaluate the self. It’s the ability to question our own instincts, patterns, and assumptions. Oiêsis, self-deception or arrogant and unchallenged opinion, requires that we hold all our opinions up to hard scrutiny; even our eyes deceive us.

On the one hand, that’s alarming. I can’t even trust my own senses?!

Sure, you could think about it that way. Or you could take it another way: because our senses are often wrong, our emotions overly alarmed, our projections overly optimistic, we’re better off not rushing into conclusions about anything. We can take a beat with everything we do and become aware of everything that’s going on so we can make the right decision.

March 8th

DON’T UNINTENTIONALLY HAND OVER YOUR FREEDOM  
"If a person gave away your body to some passerby, you would be ruined. If you don’t, you’ll be free."

—

EPICETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.2.1; 4–5  

"From good people you’ll learn good, but if you mingle with the bad, you’ll destroy such a soul as you had."

—

MUSONIUS RUFUS, QUOTING THEOGNIS OF MEGARA, LECTURES, 11.53.21–22

Rohn’s widely quoted line is: "You are the average of the five people you spend the most time with." James Altucher advises young writers and entrepreneurs to find their “scene”—a group of peers who push them to be better. Your father might have given you a warning when he saw you spending time with some bad kids: "Remember, you become like your friends." One of Goethe’s maxims captures it better: "Tell me with whom you consort and I will tell you who you are."

Consciously consider whom you allow into your life—not like some snobby elitist but like someone who is trying to cultivate the best life possible. Ask yourself about the people you meet and spend time with:

Are they making me better? Do they encourage me to push forward and hold me accountable? Or do they drag me down to their level?

Now, with this in mind, ask the most important question:

Should I spend more or less time with these folks?

The second part of Goethe’s quote tells us the stakes of this choice: "If I know how you spend your time," he said, "then I know what might become of you."

March 10th

FIND YOURSELF A CATO  
"We can remove most sins if we have a witness standing by as we are about to go wrong. The soul should have someone it can respect, by whose example it can make its inner sanctum more inviolable. Happy is the person who can improve others, not only when present, but even when in their thoughts!"

—