I will have no enemy, no one will harm you, because no harm can affect you.”
— Epictetus, Enchiridion, 1.3

After Captain James Stockdale was shot down over Vietnam, he endured seven and a half years in various prison camps. He was subjected to brutal torture but always struggled to resist. Once, when his captors intended to force him to appear in a propaganda video, he purposely and severely injured himself to make that impossible.

When Stockdale’s plane was hit, he told himself that he was “entering the world of Epictetus.” He didn’t mean that he was attending a philosophy seminar. He knew what he was to face when he crashed-landed. He knew it wouldn’t be easy to survive.
Interviewed by Jim Collins for the business classic Good to Great, Stockdale explained there was one group that had the most trouble in the prison. “It was the optimists,” he said, “… the ones who said, ‘We’re going to be out by Christmas.’ And Christmas would come, and Christmas would go. Then they’d say, ‘We’re going to be out by Easter.’ And Easter would come, and Easter would go. And then Thanksgiving, and then it would be Christmas again. And they died of a broken heart.”
But Stockdale persevered and did make it out. He quenched his desires and focused exclusively on what he did control: himself.

I September 6th

THEY CAN THROW YOU IN CHAINS, BUT . . .
“You can bind up my leg, but not even Zeus has the power to break my freedom of choice.”
— Epictetus, Discourses, 1.1.23

It was said that Epictetus walked with a permanent limp as a result of being chained up as a slave. Two thousand years later, James Stockdale also had his legs chained in irons (and his arms bound behind his back and pulled from the ceiling, repeatedly wrenching them from their sockets). Future senator John McCain was in that same prison, subjected to much of the same abuse. Because his father was famous, McCain was repeatedly offered by his captors a chance to abandon his men and be sent home early. He too held tightly to his freedom of choice, declining to submit to that temptation even though it meant a loss of the physical freedom he must have achieved.

None of these men broke. No one could make them sacrifice their principles. That’s the thing—someone can throw you in chains, but they don’t have the power to change who you are. Even under the worst torture and cruelties that humans can inflict on one another, our power over our own mind and our power to make our own decisions can’t be broken—only relinquished.

I September 7th

OUR HIDDEN POWER
“Consider who you are. Above all, a human being, carrying no greater power than your own reasoned choice, which oversees all other things, and is free from any other master.”
— Epictetus, Discourses, 2.10.1

The psychologist Viktor Frankl spent three years imprisoned in various concentration camps, including Auschwitz. His family and his wife had been killed, his life’s work destroyed, his freedom taken from him. He quite literally had nothing left. Yet, as he discovered after much thought, he still retained one thing: the ability to determine what this suffering meant. Not even the Nazis could take that from him.

Further, Frankl realized that he could actually find positives in his situation. Here was an opportunity to continue testing and exploring his psychological theories (and perhaps revise them). He could still be of service to others. He even took some solace in the fact that his loved ones were spared the pain and misery that he faced daily in that camp.

Your hidden power is your ability to use reason and make choices, however limited or small. Think about the areas of your life where you are under duress or weighed down by obligation. What are the choices available to you, day after day? You might be surprised at how many there actually are. Are you taking advantage? Are you finding the positives?

I September 8th

DO NOT BE DECEIVED BY FORTUNE
“No one is crushed by Fortune, unless they are first deceived by her. . . those who aren’t pompous in good times, don’t have their bubbles burst with change. Against either circumstance, the stable person keeps their rational soul invincible, for it’s precisely in the good times they prove their strength against adversity.”
— Seneca, On Consolation to Helvia, 5.4

In the early days of what would become known as the Great Depression, a new president named Franklin D. Roosevelt was sworn in and gave his first inaugural address. As the last president to hold office before the Twentieth Amendment was ratified, FDR wasn’t able to take office until March—meaning that the country had been without strong leadership for months. Panic was in the air, banks were failing, and people were scared.

You’ve probably heard the “nothing to fear but fear itself” sound bite that FDR gave in that famous speech, but the full line is worth reading because it applies to many difficult things we face in life:
“Let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself—nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance.”

The Stoics knew that fear was to be feared because of the miseries it creates. The things we fear pale in comparison to the damage we do to ourselves and others when we unthinkingly scramble to avoid them. An economic depression is bad; a panic is worse. A tough situation isn’t helped by terror—it only makes things harder. And that’s why we must resist it and reject it if we wish to turn this situation around.

I September 10th

PREPARING ON THE SUNNY DAY
“Here’s a lesson to test your mind’s mettle: take part of a week in which you have only the most meager and cheap food, dress scantily in shabby clothes, and ask yourself if this is really the worst that you feared. It is when times are good that you should gird yourself for tougher times ahead, for when Fortune is kind the soul can build defenses against her ravages. So it is that soldiers practice maneuvers in peacetime, erecting bunkers with no enemies in sight and exhausting themselves under no attack so that when it comes they won’t grow tired.”
— Seneca, Moral Letters, 18.5–6

What if you spent one day a month experiencing the effects of poverty, hunger, complete isolation, or any other thing you might fear? After the initial culture shock, you may find that what you once thought was so terrible isn’t as bad as you imagined. And in tough times, it’s those who have prepared themselves mentally and physically who are best equipped to weather the storm.

I September 11th

THE VALUE OF PERSEVERANCE
“Perseverance beats resistance every time.”
— Epictetus, Discourses, 3.20.20

There is a saying that persistence beats resistance every time. And this couldn’t be truer than when it comes to overcoming adversity. When faced with challenges and obstacles, it’s easy to give up. But if you persevere, keep pushing forward, even when things get tough, you will eventually overcome the challenge.

Stockdale’s story is a prime example of perseverance in action. He was shot down over Vietnam and spent seven and a half years in prison camps. He faced unimaginable suffering and torture, but he never gave up. Instead, he used his experiences to become a more resilient and determined person. And it paid off—Stockdale survived the war and went on to have a distinguished career as an author, motivational speaker, and political leader.

The value of perseverance cannot be overstated. When faced with adversity, it’s easy to become discouraged and give up. But if you persevere, keep pushing forward, even when things get tough, you will eventually overcome the challenge. So the next time you face a difficult obstacle, remember that perseverance beats resistance every time.