Shop Class as Soulcraft
Matthew B. Crawford
SUMMER 2006 ~ 7
Anyone in the market for a good used machine tool should talk to Noel 
Dempsey , a dealer in Richmond, Virginia. Noel’s bustling warehouse is 
full of metal lathes, milling machines, and table saws, and it turns out that 
most of it is from schools. EBay is awash in such equipment, also from 
schools. It appears shop class is becoming a thing of the past, as educators 
prepare students to become “knowledge workers.” 
At the same time, an engineering culture has developed in recent years 
in which the object is to “hide the works,” rendering the artifacts we use 
unintelligible to direct inspection. Lift the hood on some cars now (espe-
cially German ones), and the engine appears a bit like the shimmering, 
featureless obelisk that so enthralled the cavemen in the opening scene of 
the movie 2001: A Space Odyssey. Essentially , there is another hood under 
the hood. This creeping concealedness takes various forms. The fasteners 
holding small appliances together now often require esoteric screwdrivers 
not commonly available, apparently to prevent the curious or the angry 
from interrogating the innards. By way of contrast, older readers will 
recall that until recent decades, Sears catalogues included blown-up parts 
diagrams and conceptual schematics for all appliances and many other 
mechanical goods. It was simply taken for granted that such information 
would be demanded by the consumer. 
A decline in tool use would seem to betoken a shift in our mode of 
inhabiting the world: more passive and more dependent. And indeed, 
there are fewer occasions for the kind of spiritedness that is called forth 
when we take things in hand for ourselves, whether to fix them or to 
make them. What ordinary people once made, they buy; and what they 
once fixed for themselves, they replace entirely or hire an expert to repair, 
whose expert fix often involves installing a pre-made replacement part. 
So perhaps the time is ripe for reconsideration of an ideal that has 
fallen out of favor: manual competence, and the stance it entails toward 
the built, material world. Neither as workers nor as consumers are we 
much called upon to exercise such competence, most of us anyway , and 
Matthew B. Crawford is a postdoctoral fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies in 
Culture at the University of Virginia and a contributing editor of The New Atlantis. He 
would like to thank Joe Davis and David Franz, both of the Institute, for their contributions 
to this article.
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
Editor’s Note: This essay has been expanded into a book—Shop Class as Soulcraft: An
Inquiry into the Value of Work—published by Penguin in 2009.8 ~ THE NEW ATLANTIS
MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
merely to recommend its cultivation is to risk the scorn of those who take 
themselves to be the most hard-headed: the hard-headed economist will 
point out the opportunity costs of making what can be bought, and the 
hard-headed educator will say that it is irresponsible to educate the young 
for the trades, which are somehow identified as the jobs of the past. But 
we might pause to consider just how hard-headed these presumptions 
are, and whether they don’t, on the contrary , issue from a peculiar sort of 
idealism, one that insistently steers young people toward the most ghostly 
kinds of work.
Judging from my admittedly cursory survey , articles began to appear 
in vocational education journals around 1985 with titles such as “The 
Soaring Technology Revolution” and “Preparing Kids for High-Tech 
and the Global Future.” Of course, there is nothing new about American 
future-ism. What is new is the wedding of future-ism to what might be 
called “virtualism”: a vision of the future in which we somehow take leave 
of material reality and glide about in a pure information economy. New 
and yet not so new—for fifty years now we’ve been assured that we are 
headed for a “post-industrial economy.” While manufacturing jobs have 
certainly left our shores to a disturbing degree, the manual trades have 
not. If you need a deck built, or your car fixed, the Chinese are of no help. 
Because they are in China. And in fact there are reported labor shortages 
in both construction and auto repair. Yet the trades and manufacturing 
are lumped together in the mind of the pundit class as “blue collar,” and 
their requiem is intoned. Even so, the Wall Street Journal recently won-
dered whether “skilled [manual] labor is becoming one of the few sure 
paths to a good living.” This possibility was brought to light for many 
by the bestseller The Millionaire Next Door, which revealed that the typi-
cal millionaire is the guy driving a pickup, with his own business in the 
trades. My real concern here is not with the economics of skilled manual 
work, but rather with its intrinsic satisfactions. I mention these economic 
rumors only to raise a suspicion against the widespread prejudice that 
such work is somehow not viable as a livelihood.
The Psychic Appeal of Manual Work 
I began working as an electrician’s helper at age fourteen, and started a 
small electrical contracting business after college, in Santa Barbara. In 
those years I never ceased to take pleasure in the moment, at the end of a 
job, when I would flip the switch. “ And there was light.” It was an experi-
ence of agency and competence. The effects of my work were visible for all SUMMER 2006 ~ 9
SHOP CLASS AS SOULCRAFT
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
to see, so my competence was real for others as well; it had a social curren-
cy. The well-founded pride of the tradesman is far from the gratuitous “self-
esteem” that educators would impart to students, as though by magic.
I was sometimes quieted at the sight of a gang of conduit entering 
a large panel in a commercial setting, bent into nestled, flowing curves, 
with varying offsets, that somehow all terminated in the same plane. This 
was a skill so far beyond my abilities that I felt I was in the presence of 
some genius, and the man who bent that conduit surely imagined this 
moment of recognition as he worked. As a residential electrician, most of 
my work got covered up inside walls. Yet even so, there is pride in meet-
ing the aesthetic demands of a workmanlike installation. Maybe another 
electrician will see it someday. Even if not, one feels responsible to one’s 
better self. Or rather, to the thing itself—craftsmanship might be defined 
simply as the desire to do something well, for its own sake. If the primary 
satisfaction is intrinsic and private in this way , there is nonetheless a sort 
of self-disclosing that takes place. As Alexandre Kojève writes:
The man who works recognizes his own product in the World that has 
actually been transformed by his work: he recognizes himself in it, he 
sees in it his own human reality , in it he discovers and reveals to oth-
ers the objective reality of his humanity , of the originally abstract and 
purely subjective idea he has of himself.
The satisfactions of manifesting oneself concretely in the world 
through manual competence have been known to make a man quiet and 
easy. They seem to relieve him of the felt need to offer chattering interpre-
tations of himself to vindicate his worth. He can simply point: the building 
stands, the car now runs, the lights are on. Boasting is what a boy does, 
who has no real effect in the world. But craftsmanship must reckon with 
the infallible judgment of reality , where one’s failures or shortcomings 
cannot be interpreted away.
Hobbyists will tell you that making one’s own furniture is hard to 
justify economically. And yet they persist. Shared memories attach to the 
material souvenirs of our lives, and producing them is a kind of commu-
nion, with others and with the future. Finding myself at loose ends one 
summer in Berkeley , I built a mahogany coffee table on which I spared no 
expense of effort. At that time I had no immediate prospect of becoming a 
father, yet I imagined a child who would form indelible impressions of this 
table and know that it was his father’s work. I imagined the table fading 
into the background of a future life, the defects in its execution as well 
as inevitable stains and scars becoming a surface textured enough that 10 ~ THE NEW ATLANTIS
MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
memory and sentiment might cling to it, in unnoticed accretions. More 
fundamentally , the durable objects of use produced by men “give rise to 
the familiarity of the world, its customs and habits of intercourse between 
men and things as well as between men and men,” as Hannah Arendt says. 
“The reality and reliability of the human world rest primarily on the fact 
that we are surrounded by things more permanent than the activity by 
which they were produced, and potentially even more permanent than the 
lives of their authors.”
Because craftsmanship refers to objective standards that do not issue 
from the self and its desires, it poses a challenge to the ethic of consumer-
ism, as the sociologist Richard Sennett has recently argued. The crafts-
man is proud of what he has made, and cherishes it, while the consumer 
discards things that are perfectly serviceable in his restless pursuit of the 
new. The craftsman is then more possessive, more tied to what is pres-
ent, the dead incarnation of past labor; the consumer is more free, more 
imaginative, and so more valorous according to those who would sell us 
things. Being able to think materially about material goods, hence criti-
cally , gives one some independence from the manipulations of marketing, 
which typically divert attention from what a thing is  to a back-story inti-
mated through associations, the point of which is to exaggerate minor 
differences between brands. Knowing the production narrative, or at 
least being able to plausibly imagine it, renders the social narrative of the 
advertisement less potent. The tradesman has an impoverished fantasy 
life compared to the ideal consumer; he is more utilitarian and less given 
to soaring hopes. But he is also more autonomous.
This would seem to be significant for any political typology. Political 
theorists from Aristotle to Thomas Jefferson have questioned the repub-
lican virtue of the mechanic, finding him too narrow in his concerns to 
be moved by the public good. Yet this assessment was made before the 
full flowering of mass communication and mass conformity , which pose 
a different set of problems for the republican character: enervation of 
judgment and erosion of the independent spirit. Since the standards of 
craftsmanship issue from the logic of things rather than the art of persua-
sion, practiced submission to them perhaps gives the craftsman some psy-
chic ground to stand on against fantastic hopes aroused by demagogues, 
whether commercial or political. The craftsman’s habitual deference is 
not toward the New, but toward the distinction between the Right Way 
and the Wrong Way. However narrow in its application, this is a rare 
appearance in contemporary life—a disinterested, articulable, and pub-
licly affirmable idea of the good. Such a strong ontology is somewhat at SUMMER 2006 ~ 11
SHOP CLASS AS SOULCRAFT
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
odds with the cutting-edge institutions of the new capitalism, and with 
the educational regime that aims to supply those institutions with suitable 
workers—pliable generalists unfettered by any single set of skills.
Today , in our schools, the manual trades are given little honor. The 
egalitarian worry that has always attended tracking students into “college 
prep” and “vocational ed” is overlaid with another: the fear that acquir-
ing a specific skill set means that one’s life is determined. In college, by 
contrast, many students don’t learn anything of particular application; 
college is the ticket to an open future. Craftsmanship entails learning 
to do one thing really well, while the ideal of the new economy is to be 
able to learn new things, celebrating potential rather than achievement. 
Somehow, every worker in the cutting-edge workplace is now supposed 
to act like an “intrapreneur,” that is, to be actively involved in the continu-
ous redefinition of his own job. Shop class presents an image of stasis that 
runs directly counter to what Richard Sennett identifies as “a key element 
in the new economy’s idealized self: the capacity to surrender, to give up 
possession of an established reality.” This stance toward “established real-
ity ,” which can only be called psychedelic, is best not indulged around a 
table saw. It is dissatisfied with what Arendt calls the “reality and reliabil-
ity” of the world. It is a strange sort of ideal, attractive only to a peculiar 
sort of self—gratuitous ontological insecurity is no fun for most people.
As Sennett argues, most people take pride in being good at some-
thing specific, which happens through the accumulation of experience. 
Yet the flitting disposition is pressed upon workers from above by the 
current generation of management revolutionaries, for whom the ethic of 
craftsmanship is actually something to be rooted out from the workforce. 
Craftsmanship means dwelling on a task for a long time and going deeply 
into it, because one wants to get it right. In management-speak, this is 
called being “ingrown.” The preferred role model is the management con-
sultant, who swoops in and out, and whose very pride lies in his lack of 
particular expertise. Like the ideal consumer, the management consultant 
presents an image of soaring freedom, in light of which the manual trades 
appear cramped and paltry.
The Cognitive Demands of Manual Work
In The Mind at Work , Mike Rose provides “cognitive biographies” of 
several trades, and depicts the learning process in a wood shop class. He 
writes that “our testaments to physical work are so often focused on the 
values such work exhibits rather than on the thought it requires. It is a 12 ~ THE NEW ATLANTIS
MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
subtle but pervasive omission....I t  i s  a s  though in our cultural iconogra-
phy we are given the muscled arm, sleeve rolled tight against biceps, but 
no thought bright behind the eye, no image that links hand and brain.” 
Skilled manual labor entails a systematic encounter with the material 
world, precisely the kind of encounter that gives rise to natural science. 
From its earliest practice, craft knowledge has entailed knowledge of the 
“ways” of one’s materials—that is, knowledge of their nature, acquired 
through disciplined perception and a systematic approach to problems. 
And in fact, in areas of well-developed craft, technological developments 
typically preceded and gave rise to advances in scientific understanding, 
not vice versa. The steam engine is a good example. It was developed 
by mechanics who observed the relations between volume, pressure, and 
temperature. This at a time when theoretical scientists were tied to the 
caloric theory of heat, which later turned out to be a conceptual dead end. 
The success of the steam engine contributed to the development of what 
we now call classical thermodynamics. This history provides a nice illus-
tration of a point made by Aristotle:
Lack of experience diminishes our power of taking a comprehensive 
view of the admitted facts. Hence those who dwell in intimate associa-
tion with nature and its phenomena are more able to lay down princi-
ples such as to admit of a wide and coherent development; while those 
whom devotion to abstract discussions has rendered unobservant of 
facts are too ready to dogmatize on the basis of a few observations.
Another example is the Vernier scale used on machinists’ calipers and 
micrometers. Invented in 1631, it is a sort of mechanical calculus that 
renders continuous measurement in discrete digital approximation to 
four decimal places. Such inventions capture a reflective moment in which 
some skilled worker has made explicit the assumptions that are implicit 
in his manual skill.
In what has to be the best article ever published in an education jour-
nal, the cognitive scientists Mike Eisenberg and Ann Nishioka Eisenberg 
give real pedagogical force to this reflective moment, and draw out its 
theoretical implications (“Shop Class for the Next Millennium: Education 
Through Computer-Enriched Handicrafts,” in the Journal of Interactive 
Media in Education). They offer a computer program to facilitate making 
origami, or rather Archimedean solids, by unfolding these solids into two 
dimensions. But they then have their students actually make the solids, 
out of paper cut according to the computer’s instructions. “Computational 
tools for crafting are entities poised somewhere between the abstract, SUMMER 2006 ~ 13
SHOP CLASS AS SOULCRAFT
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
untouchable world of software objects and the homey constraints of 
human dexterity; they are therefore creative exercises in making con-
scious those aspects of craft work...t h a t  a r e  often more easily represented 
‘in the hand’ than in language.” It is worth pausing to consider their 
efforts, as they have implications well beyond mathematics instruction. 
In our early work with HyperGami, we often ran into situations in 
which the program provided us with a folding net that was math-
ematically correct—i.e., a technically correct unfolding of the desired 
solid—but otherwise disastrous. Figure 7 shows an example. Here, we 
are trying to create an approximation to a cone—a pyramid on a regu-
lar octagonal base. HyperGami provides us with a folding net that will, 
indeed, produce a pyramid; but typically , no paper crafter would come 
up with a net of this sort, since it is fiendishly hard to join together 
those eight tall triangles into a single vertex. In fact, this is an illustra-
tive example of a more general idea—the difficulty of formalizing, in 
purely mathematical terms, what it means to produce a ‘realistic’ (and 
not merely technically correct) solution to an algorithmic problem 
derived from human practice.
I take their point to be that the crafting problem is in fact not reducible 
to an algorithmic problem. More precisely , any algorithmic solution to 
the crafting problem cannot itself be generated algorithmically , as it must 
include ad hoc constraints known only through practice, that is, through 
embodied manipulations. Those constraints cannot be arrived at deductive-
ly , starting from mathematical entities. It is worth noting in passing that 
this has implications for the theory of mind favored by artificial intelligence 
researchers, as it speaks to the “computability” of pragmatic cognition. It 
would be a task for cognitive science to determine if these considerations 
place a theoretical limit on the automation of work, but I can speak first-
hand to how one area of work is resistant to algorithmic thinking.
Following graduate school in Chicago, I took a job in a Washington, 
D.C. think tank. I hated it, so I left and opened a motorcycle repair shop 
in Richmond. When I would come home from work, my wife would sniff 
at me and say “carbs” or “brakes,” corresponding to the various solvents 
used. Leaving a sensible trace, my day was at least imaginable to her. But 
while the filth and odors were apparent, the amount of head-scratching 
I’d done since breakfast was not. Mike Rose writes that in the practice 
of surgery , “dichotomies such as concrete versus abstract and technique 
versus reflection break down in practice. The surgeon’s judgment is 
simultaneously technical and deliberative, and that mix is the source of its 14 ~ THE NEW ATLANTIS
MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
power.” This could be said of any manual skill that is diagnostic, includ-
ing motorcycle repair. You come up with an imagined train of causes for 
manifest symptoms and judge their likelihood before tearing anything 
down. This imagining relies on a stock mental library , not of natural kinds 
or structures, like that of the surgeon, but rather the functional kinds of 
an internal combustion engine, their various interpretations by different 
manufacturers, and their proclivities for failure. You also develop a library 
of sounds and smells and feels. For example, the backfire of a too-lean 
fuel mixture is subtly different from an ignition backfire. If the motor-
cycle is thirty years old, from an obscure maker that went out of business 
twenty years ago, its proclivities are known mostly through lore. It would 
 probably be impossible to do such work in isolation, without access to a 
collective historical memory; you have to be embedded in a community of 
mechanic-antiquarians. These relationships are maintained by telephone, 
in a network of reciprocal favors that spans the country. My most reliable 
source, Fred Cousins in Chicago, had such an encyclopedic knowledge of 
obscure European motorcycles that all I could offer him in exchange was 
regular shipments of obscure European beer. 
There is always a risk of introducing new complications when work-
ing on decrepit machines, and this enters the diagnostic logic. Measured 
in likelihood of screw-ups, the cost is not identical for all avenues of 
inquiry when deciding which hypothesis to pursue. For example, the fas-
teners holding the engine covers on 1970s-era Hondas are Phillips-head, 
and they are always stripped and corroded. Do you really want to check the 
condition of the starter clutch, if each of ten screws will need to be drilled 
out and extracted, risking damage to the engine case? Such impediments 
can cloud one’s thinking. Put more neutrally , the attractiveness of any 
hypothesis is determined in part by physical circumstances that have no 
logical connection to the diagnostic problem at hand, but a strong prag-
matic bearing on it (kind of like origami). The factory service manuals 
tell you to be systematic in eliminating variables, but they never take such 
factors into account. So you have to develop your own decision tree for 
the particular circumstances. The problem is that at each node of this new 
tree, your own, unquantifiable risk aversion introduces ambiguity. There 
comes a point where you have to step back and get a larger gestalt. Have 
a cigarette and walk around the lift. Any mechanic will tell you that it is 
invaluable to have other mechanics around to test your reasoning against, 
especially if they have a different intellectual disposition.
My shop-mate Tommy Van Auken was an accomplished visual art-
ist, and I was repeatedly struck by his ability to literally see things that Summer 2006 ~ 15
Shop Class as Soulcraft
escaped me. I had the conceit of a being an empiricist, but seeing things 
is not a simple matter. Even on the relatively primitive vintage bikes that 
were our specialty , some diagnostic situations contain so many variables, 
and symptoms can be so under-determining of causes, that explicit analyt-
ical reasoning comes up short. What is required then is the kind of judg-
ment that arises only from experience; hunches rather than rules. There 
was more thinking going on in the bike shop than in the think tank.
Socially , being the proprietor of a bike shop in a small city gave me a 
feeling I never had before. I felt I had a place in society. Whereas “think 
tank” is an answer that, at best, buys you a few seconds when someone 
asks what you do, while you try to figure out what it is that you in fact 
do, with “motorcycle mechanic” I got immediate recognition. I bartered 
services with machinists and metal fabricators, which has a very differ-
ent feel than transactions with money , and further increased my sense 
of social embeddedness. There were three restaurants with cooks whose 
bikes I had restored, where unless I deceive myself I was treated as a sage 
benefactor. I felt pride before my wife when we would go out to dinner and 
be given preferential treatment, or simply a hearty greeting. There were 
group rides, and bike night every Tuesday at a certain bar. Sometimes one 
or two people would be wearing my shop’s T-shirt. It felt good. 
Given the intrinsic richness of manual work, cognitively , socially , and 
in its broader psychic appeal, the question becomes why it has suffered 
such a devaluation in recent years as a component of education. The eco-
nomic rationale so often offered, namely that manual work is somehow 
going to disappear, is questionable if not preposterous, so it is in the 
murky realm of culture that we must look to understand these things. To 
this end, perhaps we need to consider the origins of shop class, so that we 
can better understand its demise.
Arts, Crafts, and the Assembly Line
At a time when Teddy Roosevelt preached the strenuous life and elites 
worried about their state of “over-civilized” spiritual decay , the project of 
getting back in touch with “real life” took various forms. One was romantic 
fantasy about the pre-modern craftsman. This was understandable given 
changes in the world of work at the turn of the century , a time when the 
bureaucratization of economic life was rapidly increasing the number of 
paper shufflers. The tangible elements of craft were appealing as an anti-
dote to vague feelings of unreality , diminished autonomy , and a fragmented 
sense of self that were especially acute among the professional classes.
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.16 ~ THE NEW ATLANTIS
MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
The Arts and Crafts movement thus fit easily with the new thera-
peutic ethic of self-regeneration. Depleted from his workweek in the 
corporate world, the office worker repaired to his basement workshop 
to putter about and tinker, refreshing himself for the following week. As 
T. J. Jackson Lears writes in his history of the Progressive era, No Place 
of Grace, “toward the end of the nineteenth century , many beneficiaries of 
modern culture began to feel they were its secret victims.” Various forms 
of antimodernism gained wide currency in the middle and upper classes, 
including the ethic of craftsmanship. Some Arts and Crafts enthusiasts con-
ceived their task to be evangelizing good taste as embodied in the works 
of craft, as against machine-age vulgarity. Cultivating an appreciation for 
objets d’art was thus a form of protest against modernity , with a view to 
providing a livelihood to dissident craftsmen. But it dovetailed with, and 
gave a higher urgency to, the nascent culture of luxury consumption. As 
Lears tells the story , the great irony is that antimodernist sentiments of 
aesthetic revolt against the machine paved the way for certain unattractive 
features of late-modern culture: therapeutic self-absorption and the han-
kering after “authenticity ,” precisely those psychic hooks now relied upon 
by advertisers. Such spiritualized, symbolic modes of craft practice and 
craft consumption represented a kind of compensation for, and therefore 
an accommodation to, new modes of routinized, bureaucratic work.
But not everyone worked in an office. Indeed, there was class con-
flict brewing, with unassimilated immigrants accumulating in America’s 
Eastern cities and serious labor violence in Chicago and elsewhere. To the 
upper classes of those same cities, enamored of the craft ideal, the possibil-
ity presented itself that the laboring classes might remain satisfied with 
their material lot if they found joy in their labor. Shop class could serve to 
put the proper spin on manual work. Any work, it was posited, could be 
“artful” if done in the proper spirit; somehow a movement that had started 
with reverence for the craftsman now offered an apologetic for factory 
work. As Lears writes, “By shifting their attention from the conditions of 
labor to the laborer’s frame of mind, craft ideologues could acclaim the 
value of any work, however monotonous.” 
The Smith-Hughes Act of 1917 gave federal funding for manual train-
ing in two forms: as part of general education and as a separate vocational 
program. The invention of modern shop class thus serviced both cultural 
reflexes of the Arts and Crafts movement at once. The children of the 
managerial class could take shop as enrichment to the college-prep cur-
riculum, making a bird-feeder to hang outside mom’s kitchen window, 
while the children of laborers would be socialized into the work ethic SUMMER 2006 ~ 17
SHOP CLASS AS SOULCRAFT
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
appropriate to their station through what was now called “industrial 
arts” education. The need for such socialization was not simply a mat-
ter of assimilating immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe who 
lacked a Protestant work ethic. It was recognized as a necessity for the 
broader working-class population, precisely because the institutions that 
had previously served this socializing function, apprenticeship and guild 
traditions, had been destroyed by new modes of labor. Writing in 1918, 
one Robert Hoxie worried thus: 
It is evident...t h a t  t h e  n a t i v e  efficiency of the working class must suf-
fer from the neglect of apprenticeship, if no other means of industrial 
education is forthcoming. Scientific managers, themselves, have com-
plained bitterly of the poor and lawless material from which they must 
recruit their workers, compared with the efficient and self-respecting 
craftsmen who applied for employment twenty years ago.
Needless to say , “scientific managers” were concerned more with the 
“efficient” part of this formula than with the “self-respecting” part, yet 
the two are not independent. The quandary was how to make workers 
efficient and attentive, when their actual labor had been degraded by 
automation. The motivation previously supplied by the intrinsic satisfac-
tions of manual work was to be replaced with ideology; industrial arts 
education now concerned itself with moral formation. Lears writes that 
“ American craft publicists, by treating craftsmanship . . . as an agent of 
socialization, abandoned [the] effort to revive pleasurable labor. Manual 
training meant specialized assembly line preparation for the lower classes 
and educational or recreational experiences for the bourgeoisie.” 
Of the Smith-Hughes Act’s two rationales for shop class, vocational 
and general ed, only the latter emphasized the learning of aesthetic, math-
ematical, and physical principles through the manipulation of material 
things (Dewey’s “learning by doing”). It is not surprising, then, that the 
act came four years after Henry Ford’s innovation of the assembly line. 
The act’s dual educational scheme mirrored the assembly line’s sever-
ing of the cognitive aspects of manual work from its physical execution. 
Such a partition of thinking from doing has bequeathed us the dichotomy 
of “white collar” versus “blue collar,” corresponding to mental versus 
manual. These seem to be the categories that inform the educational land-
scape even now, and this entails two big errors. First, it assumes that all 
blue collar work is as mindless as assembly line work, and second, that 
white collar work is still recognizably mental in character. Yet there is 
evidence to suggest that the new frontier of capitalism lies in doing to 18 ~ THE NEW ATLANTIS
MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
office work what was previously done to factory work: draining it of its 
cognitive elements. Paradoxically , educators who would steer students 
toward cognitively rich work options might do this best by rehabilitating 
the manual trades, based on a firmer grasp of what such work is really 
like.  And would this not be in keeping with their democratic mission?  Let 
them publicly honor those who gain real craft knowledge, the sort we all 
depend on every day.
The Degradation of Blue-Collar Work
The degradation of work in the last century is often tied to the evils of 
technology in one way or another. And it is certainly true that “techni-
cal progress has multiplied the number of simplified jobs,” as one French 
sociologist wrote in the 1950s. This writer pointed out a resemblance 
between the Soviet bloc and the Western bloc with regard to work; both 
rival civilizations were developing “that separation between planning and 
execution which seems to be in our day a common denominator linking 
all industrial societies together.” Yet while technology plays a role in 
facilitating this separation of planning and execution, the basic logic that 
drives the separation rests not on technological progress, but rather on 
a certain mode of economic relations, as Harry Braverman has shown in 
his masterpiece of economic reflection, Labor and Monopoly Capital: The 
Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century . Braverman was an avowed 
Marxist, writing in 1974. With the Cold War now safely decided, we may 
consider anew, without defensive ire, the Marxian account of alienated 
labor. Braverman gives a richly descriptive account of the degradation of 
many different kinds of work. In doing so, he offers nothing less than an 
explanation of why we are getting more stupid with every passing year—
which is to say , the degradation of work is ultimately a cognitive matter. 
The central culprit in Braverman’s account is “scientific manage-
ment,” which “enters the workplace not as the representative of science, 
but as the representative of management masquerading in the trappings 
of science.” The tenets of scientific management were given their first 
and frankest articulation by Frederick Winslow Taylor, an unembar-
rassed evangelist of efficiency whose Principles of Scientific Management  
was hugely influential in the early decades of the twentieth century. Stalin 
was a big fan, as were the founders of the first MBA program, at Harvard, 
where Taylor was invited to lecture annually. Taylor writes, “The man-
agers assume . . . the burden of gathering together all of the traditional 
knowledge which in the past has been possessed by the workmen and then SUMMER 2006 ~ 19
SHOP CLASS AS SOULCRAFT
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
of classifying, tabulating, and reducing this knowledge to rules, laws, and 
formulae.” Scattered craft knowledge is concentrated in the hands of the 
employer, then doled out again to workers in the form of minute instruc-
tions needed to perform some part of what is now a work process. This 
process replaces what was previously an integral activity , rooted in craft 
tradition and experience, animated by the worker’s own mental image of, 
and intention toward, the finished product. Thus, according to Taylor, 
“ All possible brain work should be removed from the shop and centered 
in the planning or lay-out department.” It is a mistake to suppose that 
the primary purpose of this partition is to render the work process more 
efficient. It may or may not result in extracting more value from a given 
unit of labor time. The concern is rather with labor cost. Once the cogni-
tive aspects of the job are located in a separate management class, or bet-
ter yet in a process that, once designed, requires no ongoing judgment or 
deliberation, skilled workers can be replaced with unskilled workers at a 
lower rate of pay. Taylor writes that the “full possibilities” of his system 
“will not have been realized until almost all of the machines in the shop 
are run by men who are of smaller caliber and attainments, and who are 
therefore cheaper than those required under the old system.”
What becomes of the skilled workers? They go elsewhere, of course. 
But the competitive labor-cost advantage now held by the more modern 
firm, which has aggressively separated planning from execution, compels 
the whole industry to follow the same route, and entire skilled trades 
disappear. Thus craft knowledge dies out, or rather gets instantiated in a 
different form, as process engineering knowledge. The conception of the 
work is remote from the worker who does it. 
 Scientific management introduced the use of “time and motion 
analysis” to describe the physiological capabilities of the human body 
in machine terms. As Braverman writes, “the more labor is governed by 
classified motions which extend across the boundaries of trades and occu-
pations, the more it dissolves its concrete forms into the general types of 
work motions. This mechanical exercise of human faculties according to 
motion types which are studied independently of the particular kind of 
work being done, brings to life the Marxist conception of ‘abstract labor.’” 
The clearest example of abstract labor is thus the assembly line. The 
activity (in the Aristotelian sense) of self-directed labor, conducted by the 
worker, is dissolved into abstract parts and then reconstituted as a process 
controlled by management.
At the turn of the last century , the manufacture of automobiles was 
done by craftsmen recruited from bicycle and carriage shops: all-around 20 ~ THE NEW ATLANTIS
MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
 mechanics who knew what they were doing. In The Wheelwright’s Shop , 
George Sturt relates his experience in taking over his family business 
of making wheels for carriages, in 1884, shortly before the advent of the 
automobile. He had been a school teacher with literary ambitions, but 
now finds himself almost overwhelmed by the cognitive demands of his 
new trade. In Sturt’s shop, working exclusively with hand tools, the skills 
required to build a wheel regress all the way to the selection of trees to fell 
for timber, the proper time for felling them, how to season them, and so 
forth. To select but one minor task out of the countless he describes, here 
is Sturt’s account of fabricating a part of a wheel’s rim called a felloe:
Yet it is in vain to go into details at this point; for when the simple 
apparatus had all been gotten together for one simple-looking process, 
a never-ending series of variations was introduced by the material. 
What though two felloes might seem much alike when finished? It 
was the wheelwright himself who had to make them so. He it was 
who hewed out that resemblance from quite dissimilar blocks, for no 
two  felloe-blocks were ever alike. Knots here, shakes there, rind-galls, 
waney edges (edges with more or less bark in them), thicknesses, thin-
nesses, were for ever affording new chances or forbidding previous 
solutions, whereby a fresh problem confronted the workman’s ingenu-
ity every few minutes. He had no band-saw (as now [1923]) to drive, 
with ruthless unintelligence, through every resistance. The timber was 
far from being prey , a helpless victim, to a machine. Rather it would 
lend its own special virtues to the man who knew how to humour it.
Given their likely acquaintance with such a cognitively rich world of 
work, it is hardly surprising that when Henry Ford introduced the assem-
bly line in 1913, workers simply walked out. One of Ford’s biographers 
wrote, “So great was labor’s distaste for the new machine system that 
toward the close of 1913 every time the company wanted to add 100 men 
to its factory personnel, it was necessary to hire 963.” 
This would seem to be a crucial moment in the history of political 
economy. Evidently , the new system provoked natural revulsion. Yet, at 
some point, workers became habituated to it. How did this happen? One 
might be tempted to inquire in a typological mode: What sort of men 
were these first, the 100 out of 963 who stuck it out on the new assembly 
line? Perhaps it was the men who felt less revulsion because they had less 
pride in their own powers, and were therefore more tractable. Less repub-
lican, we might say. But if there was initially such a self-selection process, 
it quickly gave way to something less deliberate, more systemic.SUMMER 2006 ~ 21
SHOP CLASS AS SOULCRAFT
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
In a temporary suspension of the Taylorist logic, Ford was forced 
to double the daily wage of his workers to keep the line staffed. As 
Braverman writes, this “opened up new possibilities for the intensification 
of labor within the plants, where workers were now anxious to keep their 
jobs.” These anxious workers were more productive. Indeed, Ford him-
self later recognized his wage increase as “one of the finest cost-cutting 
moves we ever made,” as he was able to double, and then triple, the rate 
at which cars were assembled by simply speeding up the conveyors. By 
doing so he destroyed his competitors, and thereby destroyed the possibil-
ity of an alternative way of working. (It also removed the wage pressure 
that comes from the existence of more enjoyable jobs.) At the Columbian 
World Expo held in Chicago in 1893, no fewer than seven large-scale 
carriage builders from Cincinnati alone presented their wares. Adopting 
Ford’s methods, the industry would soon be reduced to the Big Three. So 
workers eventually became habituated to the abstraction of the assembly 
line. Evidently , it inspires revulsion only if one is acquainted with more 
satisfying modes of work.
Here the concept of wages as compensation achieves its fullest meaning, 
and its central place in modern economy. Changing attitudes toward con-
sumption seemed to play a role. A man whose needs are limited will find 
the least noxious livelihood and work in a subsistence mode, and indeed the 
experience of early (eighteenth-century) capitalism, when many producers 
worked at home on a piece-rate basis, was that only so much labor could be 
extracted from them. Contradicting the assumptions of “rational behavior” 
of classical economics, it was found that when employers would increase 
the piece rate in order to boost production, it actually had the opposite 
effect: workers would produce less, as now they could meet their fixed 
needs with less work. Eventually it was learned that the only way to get 
them to work harder was to play upon the imagination, stimulating new 
needs and wants. The habituation of workers to the assembly line was thus 
perhaps made easier by another innovation of the early twentieth century: 
consumer debt. As Jackson Lears has shown in a recent article, through 
the installment plan, previously unthinkable acquisitions became thinkable, 
and more than thinkable: it became normal to carry debt. The display of 
a new car bought on installment became a sign that one was trustworthy. 
In a wholesale transformation of the old Puritan moralism, expressed by 
Benjamin Franklin (admittedly no Puritan) with the motto “Be frugal and 
free,” the early twentieth century saw the moral legitimation of spending. 
Indeed, 1907 saw the publication of a book with the immodest title The New 
Basis of Civilization, by Simon Nelson Patten, in which the moral valence 22 ~ THE NEW ATLANTIS
MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
of debt and spending is reversed, and the multiplication of wants becomes 
not a sign of dangerous corruption but part of the civilizing process. That 
is, part of the disciplinary process. As Lears writes, “Indebtedness could 
discipline workers, keeping them at routinized jobs in factories and offices, 
graying but in harness, meeting payments regularly.”
The Degradation of White-Collar Work
Much of the “jobs of the future” rhetoric surrounding the eagerness to 
end shop class and get every warm body into college, thence into a cubicle, 
implicitly assumes that we are heading to a “post-industrial” economy in 
which everyone will deal only in abstractions. Yet trafficking in abstrac-
tions is not the same as thinking. White collar professions, too, are subject 
to routinization and degradation, proceeding by the same process as befell 
manual fabrication a hundred years ago: the cognitive elements of the job 
are appropriated from professionals, instantiated in a system or process, and 
then handed back to a new class of workers—clerks—who replace the pro-
fessionals. If genuine knowledge work is not growing but actually shrink-
ing, because it is coming to be concentrated in an ever-smaller elite, this has 
implications for the vocational advice that students ought to receive.
“Expert systems,” a term coined by artificial intelligence research-
ers, were initially developed by the military for battle command, then 
used to replicate industrial expertise in such fields as oil-well drilling 
and telephone-line maintenance. Then they found their way into medical 
diagnosis, and eventually the cognitively murky , highly lucrative, regions 
of financial and legal advice. In The Electronic Sweatshop: How Computers 
are Transforming the Office of the Future into the Factory of the Past, Barbara 
Garson details how “Extraordinary human ingenuity has been used to 
eliminate the need for human ingenuity.” She finds that, like Taylor’s 
rationalization of the shop floor, the intention of expert systems is “to 
transfer knowledge, skill, and decision making from employee to employ-
er.” While Taylor’s time and motion studies broke every concrete work 
motion into minute parts, 
The modern knowledge engineer performs similar detailed studies, 
only he anatomizes decision making rather than bricklaying. So the 
time-and-motion study has become a time-and-thought study ....T o  
build an expert system, a living expert is debriefed and then cloned by 
a knowledge engineer. That is to say , an expert is interviewed, typi-
cally for weeks or months. The knowledge engineer watches the expert 
work on sample problems and asks exactly what factors the expert SUMMER 2006 ~ 23
SHOP CLASS AS SOULCRAFT
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
considered in making his apparently intuitive decisions. Eventually 
hundreds or thousands of rules of thumb are fed into the computer. 
The result is a program that can ‘make decisions’ or ‘draw conclusions’ 
heuristically instead of merely calculating with equations. Like a real 
expert, a sophisticated expert system should be able to draw inferences 
from ‘iffy’ or incomplete data that seems to suggest or tends to rule 
out. In other words it uses (or replaces) judgment.
The human expert who is cloned achieves a vast dominion and immor-
tality , in a sense. It is other experts, and future experts, who are displaced 
as expertise is centralized. “This means that more people in the advice 
or human service business will be employed as the disseminators, rather 
than the originators, of this advice,” Garson writes. In his 2006 book 
The Culture of the New Capitalism , Richard Sennett describes just such a 
 process, “especially in the cutting-edge realms of high finance, advanced 
technology , and sophisticated services”: genuine knowledge work comes 
to be concentrated in an ever-smaller elite. It seems we must take a cold-
eyed view of “knowledge work,” and reject the image of a rising sea of 
pure mentation that lifts all boats. More likely is a rising sea of clerkdom. 
To expect otherwise is to hope for a reversal in the basic logic of the mod-
ern economy—that is, cognitive stratification. It is not clear to me what 
this hope could be based on, though if history is any guide we have to 
wonder whether the excitation of such a hope has become an instrument 
by which young people are prepared for clerkdom, in the same perverse 
way that the craft ideology prepared workers for the assembly line. Both 
provide a lens that makes the work look appealing from afar, but only by 
presenting an image that is upside down.
The Craftsman as Stoic
We are recalled to the basic antagonism of economic life: work is toil-
some and necessarily serves someone else’s interests. That’s why you get 
paid. Thus chastened, we may ask the proper question: what is it that we 
really want for a young person when we give them vocational advice? The 
only creditable answer, it seems to me, is one that avoids utopianism while 
keeping an eye on the human good: work that engages the human capaci-
ties as fully as possible. What I have tried to show is that this humane and 
commonsensical answer goes against the central imperative of capitalism, 
which assiduously partitions thinking from doing. What is to be done? I 
offer no program, only an observation that might be of interest to anyone 
called upon to give guidance to the young.24 ~ THE NEW ATLANTIS
MATTHEW B. CRAWFORD
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved. See www.TheNewAtlantis.com for more information.
Since manual work has been subject to routinization for over a century , 
the nonroutinized manual work that remains, outside the confines of the 
factory , would seem to be resistant to much further routinization. There 
still appear developments around the margins; for example, in the last 
twenty years pre-fabricated roof trusses have eliminated some of the more 
challenging elements from the jobs of framers who work for large tract 
developers, and pre-hung doors have done the same for finish carpenters 
generally. But still, the physical circumstances of the jobs performed by 
carpenters, plumbers, and auto mechanics vary too much for them to be 
executed by idiots; they require circumspection and adaptability. One feels 
like a man, not a cog in a machine. The trades are then a natural home 
for anyone who would live by his own powers, free not only of deadening 
abstraction, but also of the insidious hopes and rising insecurities that 
seem to be endemic in our current economic life. This is the stoic ideal.
So what advice should one give to a young person? By all means, go 
to college. In fact, approach college in the spirit of craftsmanship, going 
deep into liberal arts and sciences. In the summers, learn a manual trade. 
You’re likely to be less damaged, and quite possibly better paid, as an 
independent tradesman than as a cubicle-dwelling tender of information 
systems. To heed such advice would require a certain contrarian streak, 
as it entails rejecting a life course mapped out by others as obligatory and 
inevitable.