CONTENTS
Title	Page
Introduction:	What	Is	Love?
PART	I.	The	Journey	from	“Me”	to	“We”
Understanding	the	Nature	and	Nurture	of	Love
Beyond	Dependency	and	Domination—Breaking	Out	of	the	Shell	of	the	Ego
The	Natural	Stages	of	Life	and	Loving
The	Candle	of	Awareness
PART	II.	Love	Is	a	Breeze
Making	the	Most	of	Romance
Nonsense	Ideas	in	Your	Head
“Love	Hurts”	and	Other	Misunderstandings
Attraction	and	Opposition
Dropping	Out	of	the	Lonely	Hearts	Club
Soul	Mates	or	Cell	Mates?
Love	and	the	Art	of	Non-doing
PART	III.	From	Relationship	to	Relating—Love	as	a	State	of
Being
“Love”	Is	a	Verb
Couples	Counseling—Insights	for	Living	and	Growing	in	Love
Only	Love	Remains
About	the	Author
OSHO	
International	Meditation	Resort
For	More	Information
Also	by	Osho
Copyright	
INTRODUCTION:	WHAT	IS	LOVE?
It	is	unfortunate	that	we	have	to	ask	this	question.	In	the	natural	course	of	things
everybody	would	know	what	love	is.	But	as	it	is,	we	are	in	a	state	of	ignorance,	
which	is	unfortunate.
Love	has	been	misinterpreted,	misunderstood,	and	even	maligned.	It	is	one	of	the	most	precious	
gifts	that	humanity	possesses,	and	yet	it	seems	to	have	become	a	victim	of	our	own	misconceptions	
and	misunderstandings.
Love	is	not	just	an	emotion	or	a	feeling,	but	also	a	state	of	being.	It	is	the	glue	that	binds	us	to	each	other	and	to	ourself.
In	this	book,	we	will	explore	the	nature	and	nurture	of	love,	as	well	as	its	role	in	our	lives.	We	will	also	look	at	the	ways	in	which	we	can	foster	and	deepen	our	understanding	
and	experience	of	love.
PART	I.	The	Journey	from	“Me”	to	“We”
In	this	part,	we	will	explore	the	ways	in	which	we	can	overcome	our	ego	and	find	a	sense	of	connection	and	oneness	with	others.
PART	II.	Love	Is	a	Breeze
In	this	part,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	we	can	deepen	our	understanding	and	experience	of	love.	We	will	also	explore	the	role	of	romance	in	our	lives.
PART	III.	From	Relationship	to	Relating—Love	as	a	State	of
Being
In	this	part,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	we	can	create	healthy	and	fulfilling	relationships.	We	will	also	explore	the	ways	in	which	we	can	foster	a	state	of	love	in	our	lives.
“Love”	Is	a	Verb
In	this	chapter,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	we	can	use	love	as	a	powerful	tool	to	transform	ourselves	and	our	relationships.	We	will	also	explore	the	role	of	compassion	and	empathy	in	our	lives.
Couples	Counseling—Insights	for	Living	and	Growing	in	Love
In	this	chapter,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	couples	can	enhance	their	relationships	by	deepening	their	connection	and	understanding	of	each	other.	We	will	also	explore	the	role	of	communication	and	trust	in	our	lives.
Only	Love	Remains
In	this	chapter,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	love	can	overcome	any	obstacle	or	challenge	that	we	face.	We	will	also	explore	the	role	of	forgiveness	and	grace	in	our	lives.
About	the	Author
Osho	was	an	Indian	spiritual	leader	and	philosopher,	who	is	known	for	his	contributions	to	the	fields	of	meditation	and	humanistic	psychology.	He	founded	the	Osho	International	Meditation	Resort,	which	has	centers	in	over	100	countries.
For	More	Information
To	learn	more	about	Osho	and	his	work,	visit	www.osho.com.

The human being is an imitator. They are constantly repeating the patterns of their parents, even if they do not realize it. The first step to break free from this cycle is to get rid of your parents, not physically, but by getting rid of the parental voices inside you. You must efface them and become free for the first time.

Every person feels resentful towards their parents because of the harm they have done. However, it is essential to understand that they wished all good for you and wanted everything for your well-being. But what can they do? Just by wanting something or having good wishes, nothing happens. They were well-wishers, but they are robots who create an atmosphere in which their children will eventually become like them.

To break the cycle of imitation, you must get rid of your parents. This requires careful observation and behavioral changes. Watch when your mother is there functioning through you and stop that. Do something absolutely new that your mother could not even have imagined.

People think they can only love when they find a worthy partner or someone who is perfect. But this idea has been put into their minds, making them unhappy because they keep looking for the perfect man or woman without ever finding it. To flow and grow in love needs no perfection. Love has nothing to do with the other person being perfect. A loving person simply loves, just like an alive person breathes and drinks.

The second thing to remember is not to ask for perfection; otherwise, you will not find any love flowing in you. You must be open to imperfections and understand that people who demand perfection are very unloving and neurotic. Once a man loves a woman or a woman loves a man, demands immediately enter. The woman starts demanding that the man should be perfect, just because he loves her. As if he has committed a sin! Now he has to become perfect or drop all his limitations—suddenly, just because of this woman?

Naturally, becoming superhuman is very difficult, so people become cheats. They start pretending and acting and playing games in the name of love. Therefore, remember never to demand perfection in order to find true love

In the beginning it will be hard, because your whole life you have been trained not to give but to get. In the beginning you will have to fight with your own armor. Your musculature has become hard, your heart has become frozen, you have become cold. In the beginning it will be difficult, but each step will lead to a further step, and by and by the river starts flowing. First get rid of your parents. In getting rid of your parents you get rid of society, in getting rid of your parents you get rid of civilization, education, everything—because your parents represent all that. You become an individual. For the first time you are no longer part of the mass, you have an authentic individuality. You are on your own. This is what growth is. This is what a grown-up person should be. A grown-up person is one who needs no parents. A grown-up person is one who needs nobody to cling to or lean upon. A grown-up person is one who is happy in his aloneness—his aloneness is a song, a celebration. A grown-up person is one who can be with himself happily. His aloneness is not loneliness, his solitariness is solitude, it is meditative. One day you had to come out of your mother's womb. Then one day you had to come out of your family atmosphere, another womb, to go to school. Then one day you had to come out of your school atmosphere, another womb, to go into the larger world. But deep down you are still a child. You are still in the womb! Layers upon layers of womb are there and that womb has to be broken. This is what in the East we have called the second birth. When you have attained to a second birth, you are completely free of parental impressions. And the beauty is that only such a person feels grateful to the parents. The paradox is that only such a person can forgive his parents. He feels compassion and love for them, he feels tremendously for them because they have also suffered in the same way.

To understand the roots of human egoism and conflict, we must consider our early dependence on others. A child is born absolutely helpless, particularly a human child. He cannot survive without others' help. Most animals, birds, and trees do not need such extensive care; even if they sometimes require help, it is very little – maybe only a few days or months. But a human child is so helpless that he must depend on others for years. It is here that the root has to be sought. 

Why does helplessness create the human ego? The child is helpless and depends on others, but the ignorant mind of the child interprets this dependence as if he is the center of the whole world. The child thinks, "Whenever I cry, my mother runs immediately; whenever I am hungry, I just have to give an indication and the breast is given; whenever I am wet, just a slight cry and somebody comes and changes my clothes." The child lives like an emperor. In fact, he is absolutely helpless and dependent, and the mother and father, the family and his caretakers are all helping him survive. They are not dependent on the child – the child is dependent on them. But the mind of the child interprets this as if he is the center of the whole world, as if the whole world exists just for him.

And the world of the child is very small in the beginning. It consists of the mother, the caretaker, the father on the fringe – this is the child's whole world. These people love the child. And the child becomes more and more egoistic. He feels himself to be the very center of all existence, and in that way the ego is created. Through dependence and helplessness, the ego is created.

In fact, the child's real situation is just the contrary from what he thinks; there is no real justification to create such an ego. But the child is absolutely ignorant, he is not capable of understanding the complexity of the thing. He cannot know that he is helpless – he thinks he is the dictator! And then for his whole life he will try to remain the dictator. He will become a Napoleon, an Alexander, an Adolf Hitler – your presidents, prime ministers, dictators are all childish. They are trying to achieve the same thing they experienced as children; they want to be the center of the whole existence. With them the world should live and die; the whole world is their periphery and they are the center of it; they have been brought up in the same way.

There exists a certain school of psychoanalysts in the West who have proposed that unless children are brought up without their fathers and mothers, the world will never be at peace. I do not support them because then children will never be brought up in any way! These psychologists have something of truth in their proposal, but it is a very dangerous idea. Because if children are brought up in nurseries without fathers and mothers, without any love, with total indifference, they may not have the problems of the ego but they will have other, even more damaging and dangerous problems.

If a child is brought up in a situation where love is lacking, they will not have egos – that's true. Their life will not have so much struggle and fight. But they will not be able to stand up for themselves at all. They will always be in flight, escaping from everybody, hiding in caves in their own being. They will not become Buddhas, they will not become radiant with vitality; they will not be centered, at ease, at home. So I do not support these psychologists. Their approach would create robots, not human beings – and robots of course have no problems. Or, they may create human beings who are more like animals. There will be less anxiety, less ulcers, less cancer but that is not worth achieving when it means that you cannot grow to a higher peak of consciousness. Instead you would be falling downwards; it will be a regression. Of course, if you become an animal there will be no anguish at all because there is nobody inside to feel anguished, to feel anxious. But this is not worth achieving. One has to be like a god, not like a rock. And by that I mean it to have absolute consciousness and still have no worries, no anxieties, no problems; to enjoy life like the birds, to celebrate life like the birds – not through regression but by growing to the optimum of consciousness.

will die. The protection can go on too long, then it becomes a prison. The protection must remain a protection while it is needed, and when the moment comes for the hard shell of the seed to die into the earth, it should die naturally so that the seed can sprout and life can be born. The ego is just a protective shell—the child needs it because he is helpless. The child needs it because he is weak; the child needs it because he is vulnerable and there are millions of forces all around. He needs protection, a home, a base. The whole world may be indifferent but he can always look toward home, and from there he can gather significance. But, with significance comes the ego. The child becomes egoistic, and with this ego arise all the problems you face. This ego will not allow you to fall in love. This ego would like everybody to surrender to you; it will not allow you to surrender to anybody—and love happens only when you surrender. When you force somebody else to surrender, it is hateful, destructive. It is not love. And if there is no love, your life will be without warmth, without any poetry in it. It may be prose, mathematical, logical, rational. But how can one live without poetry? Prose is okay, rationality is okay, it is utilitarian, needed—but living just through reason and logic can never be a celebration, can never be festive. And when life is not festive, it is boring. Poetry is needed—but for poetry you need surrender. You need to throw off this ego. If you can do it, if you can put it aside even for a few moments, your life will have glimpses of the beautiful, of the divine. Without poetry you cannot really live, you can only exist. Love is poetry. And if love is not possible, how can you be prayerful, meditative, aware? It becomes almost impossible. And without a meditative awareness, you will remain just a body; you will never become aware of the innermost soul. Only in prayerfulness, in a deep meditation and silence do you reach the peaks. That prayerful silence, that meditative awareness is the highest peak of experience—but love opens the door. Carl Gustav Jung, after a lifetime of studying thousands of people—thousands of cases of people who were ill, psychologically crippled, psychologically confused—said that he had never come across a psychologically crippled person who was not overwhelmed by his own family. The ego is born in the relationship with the father and mother, and it has to be tackled there. Otherwise you will go on cutting branches and leaves of the tree, and the root remains untouched. If you have settled with your father and mother, you have become mature. Now there is no ego. Now you understand that you were helpless, now you understand that you depended on others, that you were not the center of the world. In fact, you were completely dependent; you could not have survived otherwise. Understanding this, the ego by and by fades and, once you are not in conflict with life, you become loose and natural, you relax. Then you float. Then the world is not filled with enemies, it is a family, an organic unity. The world is not against you, you can float with it. Finding that the ego is nonsense, finding that the ego has no grounds to exist, one simply becomes egoless. There are people who come to me and they ask, “How to fall in love? Is there a way?” How to fall in love? They ask for a way, a method, a certain technique. They don't understand what they are asking. Falling in love means that now there is no way, no technique, no method. That's why it is called “falling in”—you are no longer the controller, you simply fall in. That's why people who are very head-oriented will say love is blind. Love is the only eye, the only vision— but they will say love is blind, and if you are in love they will think you have gone mad. It looks mad to the head-oriented person, because the mind is a great manipulator. Any situation in which control is lost looks dangerous to the mind. But there is a world of the human heart, there is a world of the human being and consciousness where no technique is possible. All technologies are possible with matter; with consciousness, no technologies are possible, and in fact, no control is possible. The very effort to control or to make a thing happen is egoistic.

Shoulders is Himalayan.
All the people around you have been helped, greatly helped to be what they are. You have been helped; now you want to help the children too? All that you can do is to be loving, nourishing. Be warm, be accepting. The child brings an unknown potential, and there is no way to figure out what he is going to be. So there is no possibility to suggest, "In this way you should help the child." Each child is unique, so there cannot be a general discipline for every child.
The right way is not to help the child at all. If you have real courage then please don't help the child. Love him, nourish him. Let him do what he wants to do. Let him go where he wants to go. Your mind will be tempted again and again to interfere, and with good excuses. The mind is very clever in rationalizing: "If you don't interfere there may be danger; the child may fall into the well if you don't stop him." But I say to you, it is better to let him fall into the well than to help him and destroy him.
It is a very rare possibility that the child falls into the well - and then too, it does not mean death; he can be taken out. And if you are really so concerned, the well can be covered; but don't help the child, and don't interfere. The well can be fenced, but don't interfere with the child. Your real concern should be to remove all dangers but don't interfere with the child; let him go on his way.
You will have to understand some significant growth patterns. Life has seven-year cycles, it moves in seven-year cycles just as the earth makes one rotation on its axis in twenty-four hours. Up to seven years, if a child can be left innocent, uncorrupted by the ideas of others, then to distract him from his potential growth becomes impossible. The child's first seven years are the most vulnerable. And they are in the hands of parents, teachers, priests. How to save children from parents, priests, teachers is a question of such enormous importance that it seems almost impossible to find out how to do it. It is not a question of helping the child. It is a question of protecting the child. If you have a child, protect the child from your

cycle of seven years in life is significant as a time for rehearsal. Children will meet, mix, play, and become acquainted. This will help humanity to drop almost 90 percent of its perversions. If children from seven to fourteen are allowed to be together, to swim together, and to be naked before each other, 90 percent of perversions and 90 percent of pornography will simply disappear. Who will bother about it? When a boy has known so many girls naked, what interest can a magazine like Playboy have for him? When a girl has seen so many boys naked, I don't see that there is any possibility of curiosity about the other; it will simply disappear. They will grow together naturally, not as two different species of animals.
Right now that's how they grow, as if they are two different species of animals. They don't belong to one humankind; they are kept separate. A thousand and one barriers are created between them so they cannot have any rehearsal for their sexual life which is going to come. Because this rehearsal part of your life has been canceled by your society, you don't know what foreplay is.
Foreplay is really the most satisfying part in sex. Foreplay is more loving. Sex is simply a biological climax, but the climax of what? You have missed everything that could have made it a climax. Do you think you suddenly reach the climax, missing all the rungs of the ladder? Everybody heads straight for the climax.
But most people's sexual life is nothing but a kind of relief. Yes, for a moment you feel relieved of a burden, just like a good sneeze. How good it feels afterwards! But for how long? How many seconds, how many minutes can you brag that "I had such a sneeze, it was great." As the sneeze is gone, with it goes all the joy, too. It was simply something bothering you. You are finished with that botheration, now there is a little relaxation. That's the sexual life of most of the people in the world. Some energy was bothering you, was making you heavy; it was turning into a headache. Sex gives you relief.
But the way children are brought up is almost butchering their whole life. Those seven years of sexual rehearsal are absolutely essential. Girls and boys should be together in schools, in hostels, in swimming pools and beds. They should rehearse for the life that is going to come; they have to get ready for it. And there is no danger, there is no problem if a child is given total freedom to explore his growing sexual energy and is not condemned, repressed. But that is what is being done. It is a very strange world in which you are living. You are born of sex, you will live for sex, your children will be born out of sex—and sex is the most condemned thing, the greatest sin. And all your religions go on putting this crap in your mind.
People all around the world are full of everything rotten that you can conceive, for the simple reason that they have not been allowed to grow in the natural way. They have not been allowed to accept themselves. They all have become ghosts. They are not authentically real people, they are only shadows of someone they could have been.

The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts. Repair it into clean, readable English. Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:

cycle of seven years is immensely important because it will prepare you for the coming seven years. If you have done your homework rightly, if you have played with your sexual energy just in the spirit of a sportsman—and during those years, that is the only spirit you will have—you will not become a pervert, and all kinds of strange things will not come to your mind. Instead you will be moving naturally with the other sex, the other sex will be moving with you. There will be no hindrance, and you will not be doing anything wrong against anybody. Your conscience will be clear because nobody has put into your head ideas of what is right, what is wrong: you are simply being whatever you are.

Then from fourteen to twenty-one, your sex matures. And this is significant to understand: if the rehearsal has gone well, in the seven years when your sex matures a very strange thing happens that you may not have ever thought about because you have not been given the chance. I said to you that the second seven-year cycle, from seven to fourteen, gives you a glimpse of foreplay. The third seven-year cycle will give you a glimpse of afterplay. You are still together with girls or boys, but now a new phase starts in your being: you start falling in love. It is still not a biological interest. You are not interested in producing children, you are not interested in becoming husbands and wives, no. These are the years of romantic play. You are more interested in beauty, in love, in poetry, in sculpture, which are all different phases of romanticism. And unless a person has some romantic quality he will never know what afterplay is. Sex is just in the middle. The longer the foreplay, the better the possibility of reaching the climax; the better the possibility of reaching the climax, the better opening for afterplay. And unless a couple knows afterplay they will never know what sex in its completion is.

Now there are sexologists who are teaching foreplay. A taught foreplay is not the real thing, but they are teaching it; at least they have recognized the fact that without foreplay sex cannot reach the climax. But they are at a loss how to teach afterplay, because when a man has reached the climax he is no longer interested. He is finished, the job is done. For afterplay to happen it needs a romantic mind, a poetic mind, a mind that knows how to be thankful, how to be grateful. The person, the woman or the man who has brought you to such a climax, needs some gratitude: and unless there is afterplay they will never know what sex in its completion is.

From thirty-five to forty-two, a new step, a new door opens. If up to the age of thirty-five you have felt deep harmony, an orgasmic feeling, and you have discovered meditation through it, then from thirty-five to forty-two you will help each other go more and more into that meditation without sex, because at this point sex starts looking childish, juvenile. The age of forty-two is the time when a person should be able to know exactly who he is. From forty-nine to fifty-six this aloneness becomes your focus of being. Everything else in the world loses meaning. The only remaining meaningful thing is this aloneness.

From fifty-six to sixty-three you become absolutely what you are going to become: the potential blossoms, and from sixty-three to seventy you start getting ready to drop the body. Now you know you are not the body, you know you are not the mind either. The body was known as separate from you somewhere around the time when you were thirty-five. That the mind is separate from you was known near the time when you were forty-nine. Now everything else drops except the witnessing self. Just the pure awareness, the flame of awareness remains with you—and this is the preparation for death. Seventy is the natural life span for human beings. And if things move in this natural course then one dies with tremendous joy, with great ecstasy, feeling immensely blessed that life has not been meaningless, that at least one has found his home. And because of this richness, this fulfillment, one is capable of blessing the whole of existence. Just to be near such a person at the time of death is a great opportunity. You will feel, as the person leaves the body, as if some invisible flowers are falling upon you. Although you cannot see them, you can feel them. It is sheer joy, so pure that even to have a little taste of it is enough to transform your whole life.

Nowingly, willingly, unwillingly, but you are going—some great force is constantly working within you. Existence is evolving, it is constantly creating something within you. So the question is not how to start the journey; the question is how to recognize it. It is there, but your recognition is not there. For example, trees die, but they don’t know that. Birds and animals die, but they don’t know. Only human beings know that they have to die, and even that knowledge is very cloudy, not clear. And the same is the case with life—the birds are alive, but they don’t recognize that they are alive. How can you know life if you don’t know death? How can you know that you are alive if you don’t know that you are going to die? Both recognitions come together. Birds, animals, trees are alive, but they don’t recognize that they are alive. The human being recognizes a little, that he is going to die, but that recognition remains cloudy, hidden by thick smoke. And the same is true about life: you are alive, but you don’t know exactly what being alive means. That too is cloudy, not clear. When I say recognition, I mean becoming alert to what this life energy is, which is already on the way. To become aware of one’s own being is the beginning of the journey towards love. To come to a point where you are so absolutely alert that not even a fragment of darkness exists around you is the end of the journey. In fact, the journey never starts and never ends. You will continue even after that, but then the journey will have a totally different meaning, a totally different quality to it: it will be sheer delight. Right now it is sheer misery. “How to start the journey towards love?” Become more alert about your actions, about your relationships, about your movements. Whatever you do, even an ordinary thing like walking on the street, by and by you will become aware that you are not walking, you are being walked by. It is a very subtle feeling, that life is moving through you, not that you are moving. When you feel hungry, if you are aware you will see that it is life feeling hungry within you, not you. Becoming more alert will make you conscious of the fact that there is only one thing you have that you can call yours and that is witnessing. Everything else belongs to the universe; only witnessing belongs to you. But when you become aware of witnessing, even the idea of being “I” is dissolved. That too does not belong to you.

To explore the world of love, you are filled with so much rubbish about love that there is not much hope for you to be able to find the authentic and discard the false. For example, every child everywhere has been told in a thousand and one ways that love is eternal: once you love a person you love the person always. If you love a person and later on you feel that you don't love, it only means you never loved the person in the first place. Now this is a very dangerous idea. It is giving you an idea of permanent love and in life nothing is permanent. The flowers blossom in the morning and by the evening they are gone. Life is a continuous flux; everything is changing, moving. Nothing is static, nothing is permanent. You have been given the idea of permanent love which is going to destroy your whole life. You will expect permanent love from the poor woman, and the woman will expect permanent love from you. Love becomes secondary, permanence becomes primary. And love is such a delicate flower that you cannot force it to be permanent. You can have plastic flowers; that's what people have - marriage, their family, their children, their relatives, everything is plastic. Plastic has one very spiritual thing: it is impermanent. Real love is as uncertain as your life is uncertain. You cannot say that you will be here tomorrow. You cannot even say that you are going to survive the next moment. Your life is continuously changing - from childhood to youth, to middle age, to old age, it goes on changing. A real love will also change. It is possible that if you are enlightened your love has gone beyond the ordinary laws of life. It is neither changing nor permanent; it simply is. It is no more a question of how to love; you have become love itself, so whatever you do is loving. But before enlightenment your love is going to be the same as everything else; it will change. If you understand that it will change, that once in a while your partner may become interested in somebody, and you have to be understanding and loving and caring and allowing her to go - your life, slowly, will start settling on the right path about everything: your relationships, your meditations, your creativity, whatever you are. Dropping old concepts, ugly concepts. For example, in India, millions of women have died by being burned alive in the funeral pyre with their husbands. It shows that the possessiveness of the husband is so much that not only does he want to possess the woman while he is alive, he is afraid of what will happen when he is dead! He will not be able to do anything then, so it is better to take the woman with him. And you can see that this was applied only to women - not a single man jumped into the funeral pyre of a woman in ten thousand years. What does it mean? Does it mean that only women love men and men do not love women? Does it mean that the woman has no life of her own? Only the husband's life is her life; when the husband is dead, she has to be dead? Such nonsense ideas have settled in our heads. You have to do continuous cleaning. Whenever you see some nonsense in your head, clean it, throw it away. If you are clear and clean in the mind, you will be able to find solutions for every problem that arises in your life.

Every language is called the "mother tongue" because the father has no chance to speak to the child when the mother is present! Mother speaks, father listens—the child learns the language from the mother. And it is not only the language but all her attitudes. But life as we have lived it up to now is mostly managed by men. It is a man-made society and for centuries it has had no place for women. That's why it is so strange that women are not in sympathy with other women. But their minds are also conditioned in such a way that they are sympathetic to the man. Once in a while, it also happens, as it has happened with the questioner, that deep down a woman carries her mother's feelings. The mother has been against men—and I don't see why she should not be; there is every reason. It is absolutely well-founded, but it is not going to help human society or create a better future.

The past is past. You should start looking at men with fresh eyes—and particularly in this place, where our whole effort is to expose the conditioning, to dehypnotize ourselves. All the rubbish that you are carrying has to be thrown away; you have to become unburdened and light so that you can gain your own understanding, your own insight.

And the women in this community are not uneducated. You are financially capable of being independent—and as intelligent as any man. There is no need for you to be angry against men. If your mother was angry—perhaps she was not educated, perhaps she was not financially able to be independent. She wanted to fly in the open sky but she was encaged. You are not.

This is one of the reasons why I cannot communicate to the vast majority of the people of India: because the man will not be willing to listen to me; it goes against his domination, his power. And the woman cannot understand me; she is not educated. Even if she can understand me, she is not financially able to be independent; she cannot revolt against the man-made society. In most parts of India there is nothing like a women's liberation movement—not even the talk of it. No woman ever thinks that there is any possibility of liberation. She has lost all hope.

I am trying to create every possibility for the emergence of a new kind of human being who is not contaminated by the past, who is discontinuous with the past. It is a difficult job; it is almost like hitting my head against the wall. But I am determined to go on hitting—I trust in my head! And the wall is very old and ancient. It may hurt me, but it has to fall some day; its time is finished. It has already lived more than its life span.

So meditate more, and be aware when your mother's voice starts speaking to your mind. Slowly, slowly put that voice to sleep. Don't listen to it; it will spoil your whole life. You have to learn how to love. And when he is loved, the man becomes more polite, nicer, a gentleman. Through love, the woman starts blossoming; otherwise she remains a closed bud. Only in love, when the sun of love rises, she opens her petals. Only in love her eyes start having a different depth, a different shine; her face starts having a joyous outlook. She has a deep transformation through love; she comes to maturity, of age.

So get rid of the conditioning that your mother unconsciously has given to you. You have accepted it unconsciously. The way to get rid of it is to become conscious of it. It is a good beginning that you have asked. This is the beginning of consciousness—just the very ABC. You have to go far to change your mind completely, to be fresh, unconditioned, open and vulnerable.

And because of this conditioning you have been playing this ugly game, that whenever a man comes to you with his love, you run away, which naturally encourages him to chase you. That you enjoy, that he is chasing you. Every woman enjoys that. It is ugly, and you are not aware of its deeper implications. It means you are the prey; the man is the hunter and he is chasing game. You are allowing supremacy to the man, unknowingly. It has been traditionally given to you that the initiative in love should be taken by men, not by women; it is against feminine grace, that is "primitive."

There is really no reason for the woman to wait for the man to take the initiative. If a woman feels love for someone, she should take the initiative and she should not feel humiliated if the man is not willing. This will give them equality. These are small things that will make the liberation of women possible.

to be "game." She attracts the man, she tries in every way to attract him by her beauty, by her clothes, her perfume, her hairdo - all that she can manage. She attracts the man, and once the man is attracted, then she starts running away. But she does not run too fast either. She goes on looking back to see whether that fellow is coming or not. If he is left far behind, she waits. When he comes close again, she starts running.

This is stupid; love should be a clean affair. You love someone, you express your love and tell the other person, "You are not obliged to say yes; your no will be perfectly respected. It is just my desire. You need not unwillingly say yes to me, because that yes is dangerous unless you also feel love for me. Only then can our life become a completion."

A woman and a man in love can move into meditation very easily. Meditation and love are such close phenomena that if you move into meditation, your love energies start overflowing. If you really fall in love with someone who loves you, your meditative energies start growing; they are very deeply joined experiences. Hence I am in favor of both.

I have heard you speak about the ego and how, with awareness, one can see that it does not exist. But I realize that I never put much emphasis on awareness. Can you please show the way to become more aware?

Love is enough unto itself, if your love is not the ordinary, biological instinctive kind. It needs no training. You are born with the quality of it if it is not corrupted by others. But love should be pure. It should not be impure.

You will be surprised to know that the English word "love" comes from a very ugly root in Sanskrit. It comes from lobh. Lobh means "greed." And as far as ordinary love is concerned, it is a kind of greed. That's why there are people who love money, who love houses; there are people who love this, who love that. Even if they love a woman or a man, it is simply their greed; they want to possess everything beautiful. It is a power trip. Hence, you will find lovers continuously fighting, fighting about such trivia that they both feel ashamed "about what things we go on fighting!" But it is not a question of trivia; it is a question of who has power, who is more dominant, whose voice is heard.

Love cannot exist in such circumstances.

"In those days horses were very valuable and these were the most beautiful horses. Birbal said, 'It is useless, but if you say so I will go.' He went and everybody was found to be henpecked. It was so easy to see! Birbal would just call the person and his wife to their front door and ask the husband, 'Are you henpecked or not?' The man would look at his wife and say, 'You should have asked when I was alone. This is not right, it will create unnecessary trouble. Just for a horse I am not going to destroy my life. You take your horses, I don't want either one of them.' But then he came upon one man who was sitting in front of his house with two persons massaging him. He was a champion wrestler, a very strong man. Birbal thought, 'Perhaps this man - he could kill anybody, even without any weapons. If he just got hold of your neck you would be finished!' Birbal said, 'Can I ask you a question?' The man stood up and said, 'Question? What question?' Birbal asked him, 'Are you henpecked?' That man said, 'First, let us greet each other, a handshake.' He crushed Birbal's hand and said, 'I will not let go of your hand until tears start coming from your eyes! You dare to ask me such a question?' Birbal was nearly dying - he himself was almost a man of steel, but tears started coming, and he said, 'Just let go of me! You are not henpecked! Clearly I have just come to the wrong place to ask such a thing. But where is your wife?' The man pointed and said, 'Look, she is there, cooking my breakfast.' A very small woman was cooking his breakfast. The woman was so small and the man was so big that Birbal thought there really was a possibility that perhaps this man was not henpecked. He could kill this woman! So he said, 'Now there is no need to ask anyone else. But I would like to know who your wife is.' The man said, 'My wife? She is the one you asked me about earlier - the small one cooking my breakfast!' Then Birbal understood the whole situation and said, 'Well done! If you ever come across such a difficult problem again, just tell me. I will help you.'

In those days horses were very valuable and these were the most beautiful horses. Birbal said, 'It is useless, but if you say so I will go.' He went and everybody was found to be henpecked. It was so easy to see! Birbal would just call the person and his wife to their front door and ask the husband, 'Are you henpecked or not?' The man would look at his wife and say, 'You should have asked when I was alone. This is not right, it will create unnecessary trouble. Just for a horse I am not going to destroy my life. You take your horses, I don't want either one of them.' But then he came upon one man who was sitting in front of his house with two persons massaging him. He was a champion wrestler, a very strong man. Birbal thought, 'Perhaps this man - he could kill anybody, even without any weapons. If he just got hold of your neck you would be finished!' Birbal said, 'Can I ask you a question?' The man stood up and said, 'Question? What question?' Birbal asked him, 'Are you henpecked or not?' That man said, 'First, let us greet each other, a handshake.' He crushed Birbal's hand and said, 'I will not let go of your hand until tears start coming from your eyes! You dare to ask me such a question?' Birbal was nearly dying - he himself was almost a man of steel, but tears started coming, and he said, 'Just let go of me! You are not henpecked! Clearly I have just come to the wrong place to ask such a thing. But where is your wife?' The man pointed and said, 'Look, she is there, cooking my breakfast.' A very small woman was cooking his breakfast. The woman was so small and the man was so big that Birbal thought there really was a possibility that perhaps this man was not henpecked. He could kill this woman! So he said, 'Now there is no need to ask anyone else. But I would like to know who your wife is.' The man said, 'My wife? She is the one you asked me about earlier - the small one cooking my breakfast!' Then Birbal understood the whole situation and said, 'Well done! If you ever come across such a difficult problem again, just tell me. I will help you.'"

Very well, let's begin. The society has divided you into two parts: one with respect, the other without. The false part gets all the respect because it is created by society. It rejects the real part that comes from nature, which is beyond any society or culture. Each child is trained to be a subservient slave and societies break the very spine of every child so they become spineless. They cannot raise their voice, question anything, or believe they have control over their life.

This false love is created by society. You are told to love your mother "because she is your mother" - as if being a mother has some intrinsic quality or obligation you should love her. But it has been accepted that the mother should be loved. 

My emphasis is that the mother should be loving, and no child should ever be told to love somebody unless it happens on its own. Yes, the mother, father, family can create a milieu without saying anything; the whole energy can generate, can trigger your own forces of love.

But never say to anybody that love is a duty. It is not. Duty is a false substitute for love. When you cannot love, society goes on supplying duties. They may appear to be love, but inside there is nothing loving in it; on the contrary, it is only social formality. And you become so accustomed to social formalities that you forget completely that there are things which are waiting to happen in your life but you don't give space, you don't allow love to blossom in you.

Hence, you don't know that centering and love are one thing. Centering is more appealing to the intellectual. Nothing has to be believed; there is nobody else to whom you have to surrender. It is because of the other that every love affair becomes a tragedy. 

In Indian literature, there are no tragedies. In my student days, I was asking my professors, "Why are tragedies missing in Indian literature?" And not a single teacher or professor was able to say something significant about it. They simply shrugged their shoulders and said, "You find such questions. I have been in this university for thirty years and nobody has asked."

I said, "To me, it seems very obvious that the question has deep roots in the culture." In all other countries except India, there are tragedies – beautiful stories, but still tragedies. This is one of the first things you have to go into if you want to understand what love is. "Love" as people ordinarily use the word is not love; it is lust. And lust is bound to cause hurt because to desire somebody as an object is to offend that person. It is an insult, it is violent. When you move with lust toward someone, how long can you pretend it is love?

Love is just the opposite of it: respecting the other as an end unto himself or herself. When you love someone as an end unto himself, then there is no feeling of hurt; you become enriched through it. Love makes everybody rich. Secondly, love can only be true if there is no ego hiding behind it; otherwise, love becomes only an ego trip. It is a subtle way to dominate. 

Parents never say that their children are their possessions, they never say that they want to dominate the children, but that's actually what they do. They say they want to help, they say they want them to be intelligent, healthy, blissful, but - and that "but" is a great but - it has to be according to their ideas. Children have to be happy according to the parents' expectations. 

Children have to be intelligent, but at the same time obedient, too. This is asking for the impossible! The intelligent person cannot be obedient; the obedient person has to lose some of his intelligence. Intelligence can say yes only when it feels deep agreement with you. It cannot say yes just because you are bigger, more powerful, authoritative - a father, a mother, a priest, a politician. 

Intelligence is rebellious, and no parents would like their children to be rebellious. Rebellion will come, and it will have to come. If you don't let it come when it has to, it will come later on in uglier forms.

Be against their hidden desire to dominate. Husbands say they love their wives, but it is just domination. They are so jealous, so possessive, how can they be loving? Wives go on saying they love their husbands, but twenty-four hours a day they are creating hell; in every possible way they are reducing the husband to something ugly. The henpecked husband is an ugly phenomenon. And the problem is that first the wife reduces the husband to a henpecked husband and then she loses interest in him, because who can remain interested in a henpecked husband? He seems to be worthless; he does not seem to be man enough.
First the husband tries to make the wife just his possession, and once she is a possession he loses interest. There is some hidden logic in it: his whole interest was to possess; now that is finished, and he would like to try some other woman so he can again go on another trip of possession. Beware of these ego numbers. Then you will be hurt, because the person you are trying to possess is bound to revolt in some way or other, is bound to sabotage your tricks, your strategies, because nobody loves anything more than freedom. Even love is secondary to freedom; freedom is the highest value. Love can be sacrificed for freedom, but freedom cannot be sacrificed for love. And that's what we have been doing for centuries, sacrificing freedom for love. Then there is antagonism, conflict, and every opportunity is used to hurt each other.
Love in its purest form is a sharing of joy. It asks nothing in return, it expects nothing; hence how can you feel hurt? Be afraid of your ego, be afraid of your lust, be afraid of your greed, be afraid of your possessiveness; be afraid of your jealousy—but there is no question of being afraid of love. Love is divine! Love is like light. When there is light, darkness cannot exist. When there is love, fear cannot exist.
Love can make a great celebration out of your life, but only love—not lust, not ego, not possessiveness, not jealousy, not dependence. I think I understand what you mean when you say it is not love that hurts. Nevertheless, the kind of love you are talking about is not so easy to find. So the process of learning and growing into a more mature love is often very painful. Is pain just an inevitable part of growth?
Growth is painful because you have been avoiding a thousand and one pains in your life. By avoiding them, you cannot destroy them; they go on accumulating. You go on swallowing your pains and they remain in your system. That's why growth is painful: when you start growing, when you decide to grow, you have to face all the pains that you have repressed. You cannot just bypass them.
You have been brought up in a wrong way. Unfortunately, until now, not a single society has existed on the earth which has not been repressive of pain. All societies depend on repression. Two things they repress: one is pain, another is pleasure. And they repress pleasure also because of pain. Their reasoning is that if you are not too happy, you will never become too unhappy; if great joy is destroyed, it comes only as a shadow of pleasure. Then you walk on the plain ground; you never move on the peaks and you never fall into the valleys. But then you are part of the living dead, then you are not alive.
Life exists between this point

This tension between pain and pleasure makes you capable of creating great music; music exists only in this tension. Destroy the polarity and you will be dull, you will be stale, you will be dusty. You won't have any meaning and you will never know what splendor is. You will have missed life. One who wants to know life and live life has to accept and embrace death. They come together, they are two aspects of a single phenomenon. That's why growth is painful. You have to go into all those pains that you have been avoiding. It hurts. You have to go through all those wounds that somehow you have managed not to look at. But the deeper you go into pain, the deeper is your capacity to go into pleasure. If you can go into pain to the uttermost limit, you will be able to touch heaven. I have heard that a seeker came to a Zen master and asked, "How shall we avoid heat and cold?" Metaphorically, he is asking, "How should we avoid pleasure and pain?" That is the Zen way of talking about pleasure and pain, "heat and cold." "How shall we avoid heat and cold?" The master answered, "Be hot, be cold." To be free of pain the pain has to be accepted, inevitably and naturally. Pain is pain—a simple, painful fact. Suffering becomes poisonous only when you avoid it. When you are absent, then it enters into your system. Only when you are present can a pain become part of your being. And if you can go on taking note of your pains you will not be accumulating them. Growth means you are being born every day. Birth does not end the day you were born; on that day, it simply starts, and it is only a beginning.

Remember, only one thing is going to help you, and that is awareness - nothing else. Growth will remain painful if you don't accept life and love in all its ups and downs. The summer has to be accepted and the winter too. This is what I call meditation. Meditation is when you are emptied of all that is old and told and done to death. Then you see - or rather, then there is seeing, the birth of the new. But you will have to go through many pains, many agonies. It is because you have lived in a certain society, in a certain culture - Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, Indian, German, Japanese. These are different ways of avoiding pain and nothing else. You have been part of a culture that's why growth is painful because the culture tries to make you not grow; it wants you to remain juvenile. In the First World War and then again in the Second World War, psychologists became aware of a very strange fact: that man's average mental age is not more than twelve or thirteen. Even the man who is seventy, his mental age is somewhere between ten and thirteen. What does it mean? It simply means he stopped growing; the body continued but the mind stopped. No society allows grown-up minds. Why? Because grown-up minds are dangerous for the social structure; they are rebellious. They are dangerous for the social structure because they will see all the kinds of stupidities that go on in the name of culture, society, nation. Now see: the earth is one, and man still remains divided. All the problems of humanity can be solved if nations disappear. There is no problem actually; the basic problem is created by the boundaries of nations. Now the technology exists that can feed all the people of the world, there is no need for any starvation. But that is not possible because those boundaries won't allow it. A grown-up person will be able to see all this nonsense, a grown-up person will be able to see it through and through. A grown-up person cannot be reduced to a slave. Take hold of your being. Face your pains and throw off all kinds of bondages because only by being free of all bondages will you be able to sing your song and dance your dance. In spring, hundreds of flowers; in autumn, a harvest moon. In summer, a refreshing breeze; in winter, the snowflakes falling gently from the sky. If we can only hold on to these simple things, we would know what love is. We would understand that love is not a matter of hitting and running, but it is a matter of dancing together, singing together, meditating together. And it should not be just a mind thing, that the whole time you are thinking of how to get her to make love and then go to sleep. It should be a deeper involvement of your whole being, coming spontaneously. Beautiful music, fragrance, you are dancing hand in hand, you have again become small children playing with flowers. If lovemaking happens in this sacred atmosphere, it will have a different quality. You should understand that the woman is capable of multiple orgasms because she does not lose any energy. Man is capable of only one orgasm and he loses energy, looks depressed. Even the next morning you can see his hangover, and as he goes on growing older it becomes more and more difficult. This difference has to be understood.

Energy is not easy for everyone to create. But her orgasm has a totally different way of happening. Man's sexuality is local, like local anesthesia. A woman's body is sexual all over, and unless her whole body starts trembling with joy, each cell of her body starts becoming involved; she cannot have an orgasmic explosion. So it is not only in your case that the man is boring, it is the case for almost ninety-nine percent of women around the world. The whole situation has to be changed. The woman should not be under the man. In the first place, it is ugly—the man has a stronger body, the woman is more fragile. She should be on top of the man, not the man on top of her. Secondly, the man should remain silent, inactive, so that his orgasm is not finished within two minutes. If you are silent and let the woman go crazy on top of your chest, it will give her good exercise and bring her to an explosion of orgasmic energy. It takes time for her whole body to warm up, and if you are too active there is no time. You meet, but the meeting is not of beauty, of love, but just utilitarian. Try with your girlfriend what I am saying. You be the inactive partner and let her be the active partner. Allow her to be uninhibited. She has not to behave like a lady, she has to behave like an authentic woman. The "lady" is just created by men; the woman is created by existence. And you have to fill the gap between her orgasms. The gap can be filled in only one way, that you remain very inactive, silent, and enjoy her going crazy. She will have multiple orgasms. You should end the game with your orgasm, but you should not begin with it. Then your girlfriend will not call you a little boring. You will be a really interesting, wonderful guy who is behaving like a lady! And keep your eyes closed so that she can do anything—moving her hands, her body, moaning, groaning, shouting. You are not allowed to make much fuss about these things with her because girlfriends are not your permanent wives; no law prevents them from moving with someone who is more juicy.

Ges are there, universities, and it takes twenty-five years, twenty-six years to come out of the university with a postgraduate degree. But by that time you are no longer young. By that time you start having responsibilities: profession, family, marriage.
But during the time that you spend in the universities, before entering life, there is a long gap in which you are not engaged in any utilitarian, purposive activity. That has created the generation gap. Men and women become sexually mature—women by the age of thirteen, men by the age of fourteen—and they will be married perhaps ten or twelve years afterwards. These twelve years have made girlfriends and boyfriends possible.
It is a great opportunity for the future to understand the whole phenomenon and its psychology. You have the choice to change the old habits, to create trouble but drop old habits. Every man needs to be aware of many women. Every woman needs the experience of many other men before deciding to marry. Their experience will help them to find the right person with whom they can melt and merge without any difficulty.
"Meanwhile," you are saying, "I observed in me this destructive energy and I felt that I somehow enjoyed it!" Everybody has destructive energy, because energy, if left to itself, is bound to be destructive unless it is used with awareness and becomes creative. But the most important thing that you are saying is that, "Somehow I enjoyed it."
Then how are you going to change it? With anything that you enjoy you are bound to remain on the same level; you cannot change it, because you may not enjoy the change. And all this has come to your mind only because your girlfriend told you that you are "a little boring, very dependent, and a victim." You have energy. To enjoy destructive energy is suicidal, to enjoy destructive energy as destructive is in the service of death. If you are aware of it you have to go through a transformation. Use your energy creatively; perhaps that will make you less boring, more interesting, less dependent, less of a victim. And the most important part will be that you will not feel guilty and depressed. No creative person feels depressed and guilty. His participation in the universe through his creative actions makes him tremendously fulfilled and gives him dignity. That is the very birthright of every human being, but very few know it.
But you have also been told for thousands of years that, "If you really love then your love has to be permanent." I don't see that anything in life has the quality of being permanent. Love cannot be an exception. So don't expect that love has to be permanent. It will make your love life more beautiful, because you know today you are together, tomorrow perhaps you will have to depart. Love comes like a fresh, fragrant breeze into your home, fills it with freshness and fragrance, remains as long as existence allows it and then moves out. You should not try to close all your doors or the same fresh breeze will become absolutely stale. That's what people's lives have become—stale, ugly—and the reason lies in their idea of permanent love. In life everything is changing. And change is beautiful; it gives you more and more experience, more and more awareness, more and more maturity. All the joy and fun has gone out of my relationship, although I feel the love is still there and I don't really want us to break up. How can we put that joy and fun back into our relationship?
There is some misunderstanding in your mind. The joy is not gone, joy has never been there—it was something else. It is excitement that has gone, but you thought that excitement was joy. The joy will come now; when the excitement subsides, only then does joy come. Joy is a very silent phenomenon; it is not excitement at all, it is not feverish at all. It is tranquil, calm and cool. But this misunderstanding is not unique to you; it has become very prevalent. People think that excitement is joy. It is just an escape from misery.

Joy is a positive phenomenon. Not to be miserable is just a kind of forgetfulness. The misery is waiting back home for you, and whenever you come back it will be there. When excitement disappears, one starts thinking, "Now what is the point of this love?" What people call "love" dies with excitement, and that is a calamity. In fact, love had never been born. It was just a love of excitement; it was not real love. It was just an effort to move away from yourself. It was a search for sensation. You rightly use the word "fun" in your question; it was fun, but it was not intimacy. When excitement disappears and you just start feeling loving, love can grow; now the feverish days are over. This is the true beginning of love. But by that time your mind thinks that all is over, finished: "Search for another woman, search for another man. Now what is the point in continuing? There is no more fun!" If you go on loving now, love will take on a depth, it will become intimacy. A quality of grace will arise in it. It will have a subtlety now, it will not be superficial. It will not be fun, it will be meditation, it will be prayerfulness. It will help you to know yourself. The other will become a mirror, and through her you will be able to know yourself. Now is the time, the right time for love to grow because all the energy that was being channeled into excitement will not be wasted; it will be poured into the very roots of love, and the tree will be able to have great foliage. If you can go on growing in this intimacy, which is no longer excitement, then joy will arise: first excitement, then love, then joy. Joy is the ultimate product, the fulfillment. Excitement is just a beginning, a trigger; it is not the end. And those who finish things at excitement will never know what love is, will never know the mystery of love, will never come to know the joy of love. They will know sensations, excitement, passionate fever, but not love.

Here is the repaired text:

Her husband's face, not to get disturbed. She is thinking of Alexander the Great, Ivan the Terrible, and looking at her husband, everything falls apart. He looks just like a mouse. Even in those beautiful moments which should be sacred, meditative, of deep silence—even then you are not alone with your beloved. There is a crowd. Your mind is thinking of somebody else, your partner's mind is thinking of somebody else. Then what you are doing is just robotlike, mechanical. Some biological force is enslaving you, and you call it love.

I have heard that early in the morning, a drunkard on the beach saw a man doing pushups. The drunkard walked around him, looked very closely from here and from there, and finally said, "I should not interfere in such an intimate affair, but I have to tell you that your girlfriend has gone!"

That seems to be the situation. When you are making love, is your woman really there? Is your man really there? Or are you just doing a ritual, something which has to be done, a duty to be fulfilled?

If you want a harmonious relationship with your partner, you will have to learn to be more meditative. Love alone is not enough. Love alone is blind; meditation gives it eyes. Meditation gives it understanding. And once your love is both love and meditation, you become fellow travelers. Then it is no longer an ordinary relationship. Then it becomes a friendliness on the path towards discovering the mysteries of life.

Man alone, woman alone, will find the journey very tedious and very long, as they have found it in the past. Because seeing this continuous conflict, all religions decided that those who wanted to seek should renounce the other—the monks should be celibate, the nuns should be celibate. But in five thousand years of history, how many monks and how many nuns have become realized souls?

You cannot even give me names enough to count on ten fingers. And there have been millions of monks and nuns of all religions: Buddhist, Hindu, Christian, Mohammedan. What has happened?

The path is not so long, the goal is not so far. People are living together and their spirits are full of wounds; hence, whatsoever they do is going to end in disaster. If you love a man, meditation will be the best present that you can give to him. If you love a woman, then the Kohinoor is nothing; meditation will be a far more precious gift, and it will make your life sheer joy.

We are potentially capable of sheer joy, but we don't know how to manage it. Alone, we are at the most sad. Together, it becomes really hell. Even a man like Jean-Paul Sartre, a man of great intelligence, has to say that the other is hell, that to be alone is better, you cannot make it with the other. He became so pessimistic that he said it is impossible to make it with the other, the other is hell. Ordinarily, he is right.

With meditation, the other becomes your heaven. But Jean-Paul Sartre had no idea of meditation. That is the misery of Western man. Western man is missing the flowering of life because he knows nothing about meditation, and Eastern man is missing because he knows nothing of love. And to me, just as man and woman are halves of one whole, so are love and meditation. Meditation is man; love is woman. In the meeting of meditation and love is the meeting of man and woman. And in that meeting, we create the transcendental human being which is neither man nor woman. And unless we create the transcendental man on the earth, there is not much hope.

You have spoken about the ultimate harmony to be found in what seem to be opposites, but I feel that hate destroys love and anger kills compassion. When these extremes are fighting inside me, how can I find the harmony?

A big challenge in understanding love and compassion is that we often confuse the concept of hate with these qualities. In fact, hate can be a natural part of love, as it creates an impulse to overcome obstacles and challenges in order to draw closer together. Just like the sun needs darkness in order for its light to shine more brightly, we need hate to fully appreciate the beauty of love. The same goes for anger: while it may seem counterproductive or negative, it can also be a part of compassion that lends energy and strength to our relationships.

So instead of shying away from hate and anger, embrace them as they are inherent aspects of life. Recognize that these emotions serve a purpose in your growth, and allow them to be present alongside your love and compassion. In doing so, you'll create an environment where these positive qualities can thrive and grow stronger, allowing your relationships to reach their full potential.

not only love; I will have only love, not hate.” You will be impoverished. Have a big heart, let them both be there. There is no need to create a fight between them; there is no fight. The fight comes from your mind, from your teachings, upbringing, conditioning. The whole world goes on saying to you, “Love, don’t hate.” How can you love without hate? Jesus says, “Love your enemies.” And I tell you, “Hate your lovers also.” Then it becomes a complete whole. Otherwise, Jesus’ saying is incomplete. He says, “Love your enemies.” You only hate your enemies, and he says you should love them also. But the other part is missing. I tell you, hate your friends also; hate your lovers also, and don’t be afraid. Then by and by you will see there is no difference between the enemy and the friend, because you hate and love the enemy and you love and hate the friend. It will be only a question of the coin upside down or downside up. Then the friend is the enemy and the enemy is the friend. Then distinctions simply disappear. Don’t create a fight inside, allow them both to be there. They both will be needed. Both will give you two wings; only then can you fly.
A very intricate, complex thing has to be understood: If you are not in love, you are lonely. If you are in love, really in love, you become alone. Loneliness is sadness; aloneness is not sadness. Loneliness is a feeling of incompleteness. You need someone and the needed one is not available. Loneliness is darkness, with no light in it. A dark house, waiting and waiting for someone to come and kindle the light. Aloneness means the feeling that you are complete. Nobody is needed; you are enough. And this happens in love. Lovers become alone. Through love you touch your inner completeness. Love makes you complete. Lovers share each other, but that is not love; it is a bargain. And there is continuous conflict and struggle. The struggle is based on the fact that everybody needs freedom. Love allows freedom; not only allows, but strengthens freedom. And anything that destroys freedom is not love. It must be something else. Love and freedom go together, they are two wings of the same bird. Whenever you see that your love is going against your freedom, then you are doing something else in the name of love. Let this be your criterion: freedom is the criterion; love gives you freedom, makes you free, liberates you. And once you are totally yourself, you feel grateful to the person who has helped you. That gratefulness is almost religious. When love deteriorates it becomes possessiveness, jealousy, struggle for power, politics, domination, manipulation – a thousand and one things, all ugly. When love soars high to the purest sky it is freedom, total freedom. If you are in love, the love I am talking about your very love will help the other to be integrated. Your very love will become a cementing force for the other. In your love the other will come together as a whole, unique and individual, because your love will give freedom. Under the shade of your love, under the protection of your love, the other will start growing. All growth needs love, but unconditional love. If love has conditions then growth cannot be total, because those conditions will come in the way. Love unconditionally, don’t ask anything in return. Much comes back to you on its own – that is another thing – but don’t be a beggar. In love, be an emperor. Just give it and see what happens: a thousandfold it comes back. But one has to learn the knack. Otherwise one remains a miser; one gives a little and waits for something to come back, and that waiting and expectation destroys the whole beauty of it. When you love a person, love the person as if the person is a god, not less than that. Never love a woman as a woman and never love a man as a man, because if you love a man as a man your love becomes bestial; if you love a woman as a woman your love becomes sexual. But if you love a man or a woman beyond sex, then love has become divine. Love has become the ultimate mystery of life. It is no longer a bargain. It is no longer an exchange. It is no longer a relationship. It is no longer two individuals meeting. It is God and God are meeting – not as gods, but as human beings. That is the ultimate transformation that love can bring about in your life.

love is going to be very ordinary. Your love is not going to be more than lust. If you love a woman as a woman, your love is not going to soar very high. Love a woman as a goddess, then love becomes worship. In Tantra, the man who is going to make love to the woman has to worship her for months as a goddess. He has to visualize in the woman the mother-goddess. When the visualization has become total, when no lust arises, when seeing the woman sitting naked before him he simply feels thrilled with a divine energy and no lust arises, the very form of the woman becomes divine, and all thoughts stop and only reverence is felt—only then he is allowed to make love. It looks a little absurd and paradoxical. When there is no need to make love, then he is allowed to make love. When the woman has become a goddess, then he is allowed to make love because now love can soar high, love can become a climax, a crescendo. Now it will not be of the earth, it will not be of this world; it will not be of two bodies, it will be of two beings. It will be a meeting of two existences. Two souls will meet, merge, and mingle, and both will come out of it tremendously alone. Aloneness means purity. Aloneness means that you are just yourself and nobody else. Aloneness means that you are pure gold; just gold and nothing else, just you. Love makes you alone. Loneliness will disappear, but aloneness will arise. Loneliness is a state when you are ill with yourself, bored with yourself, tired of yourself, and you want to go somewhere and to forget yourself in being involved with somebody else. Aloneness is when you are thrilled just by your being. You are blissful just by being yourself. You need not go anywhere. Need has disappeared, you are enough unto yourself. But now, a new door opening. If you love deeply, by and by you will become aware that your love is becoming more and more meditative. A subtle quality of silence is entering in you. Thoughts are disappearing, gaps appearing, silences. You are touching your own depth. Love makes you meditative if it is on the right lines. Meditation makes you loving if it is on the right lines. The darkness of loneliness cannot be fought directly. It is something essential for everyone to understand, that there are a few fundamental things which cannot be changed. This is one of the fundamentals: you cannot fight with darkness directly, with loneliness directly, with the fear of isolation directly. The reason is that all these things do not exist; they are simply absences of something, just as darkness is the absence of light. You can go on fighting with this darkness your whole life and you will not succeed, but just a small candle is enough to dispel it. You have to work for the light because it is positive, existential; it exists on its own. And once light comes, anything that was its absence automatically disappears. Loneliness is an absence, because you don't know your aloneness. There is fear. You feel lonely so you want to cling to something, to somebody, to some relationship, just to hold on to the illusion that you are not lonely. But this is the problem: although you can forget for a moment your loneliness, behind the illusion—and the illusion is so thin that you can see behind it—there is pain in the heart, because the heart knows perfectly well that tomorrow things may not be the same, and they are not the same. Your whole life's experience supports that things go on changing. Nothing remains stable; you cannot cling to anything in a changing world. You wanted to make your friendship something permanent but your wanting is against the law of change, and that law is not going to make exceptions. It simply goes on doing its own thing.

Once you understand one day that it was good that existence did not bother about you and just went on doing whatever it wanted to do, not according to your desire. It may take a little time for you to understand. You want this friend to be your friend forever, but tomorrow he turns into an enemy. Or simply, “You get lost!” and he is no longer with you. Somebody else fills the gap who is a far superior being. Then suddenly you realize that it was good that the other one got lost; otherwise, you would have been stuck with him. But still, the lesson never goes so deep that you stop asking for permanence. You will start asking for permanence with this man, with this woman: now, this should not change. You have not really learned the lesson that change is simply the very fabric of life. You have to understand it and go with it. Don’t create illusions; they are not going to help. And everybody is creating illusions of different kinds. I used to know one man who said, “I trust only money, nothing else.” I said, “You are making a very significant statement.” He said, “Everybody changes. You cannot rely on anybody. And as you get older, only your money is yours. Nobody cares, not even your son, not even your wife. If you have money they all care, they all respect you because you have money. If you don’t have money you become a beggar.” His saying that the only thing in the world to trust is money comes out of a long experience of life, of getting cheated again and again by the people he trusted. And he thought they loved him but they were all around him for the money. “But,” I told him, “at the moment of death money is not going to be with you. You can have evidence for his existence except your desire that he should be there. But your desire is not a proof of anything. God is only a desire of the childish mind. Man has come of age, and God has become meaningless. The hypothesis has lost its grip.” What I am trying to say is that every effort that has been directed toward avoiding loneliness has failed, and will fail, because it is against the fundamentals of life. What is needed is not something in which you can forget your loneliness. What is needed is that you become aware of your aloneness, which is a reality. And it is so full; it is not empty, it is so full and so complete and so overflowing with all the juices of life, with all the beauties and benedictions of existence that once you have tasted aloneness, the pain in the heart will disappear. Instead, a new rhythm of tremendous sweetness, peace, joy, bliss, will be there. It does not mean that a person who is centered in his aloneness, complete in himself, cannot make friends. In fact, only that person can make friends, because now it is no longer a need, it is just sharing. And when you share, there is no question of clinging. You flow with existence, you flow with life’s change, because it does not matter with whom you share. It can be the same person tomorrow—the same person for your whole life—or it can be different persons. It is not a contract, it is not a marriage; it is simply out of your fullness that you want to give. So whoever happens to be near you, you give. And giving makes you more centered, more integrated, more proud—but not more egoistic, simply proud that existence has been compassionate to you. Fear disappears, darkness disappears, the pain disappears, the desire for the other disappears. You can love a person, and if the person loves somebody else there will not be any jealousy, because you loved out of so much joy. It was not a clinging, you were not holding the other person in prison.

start
having a love affair. When you are sharing your joy, you don't create a prison for anybody. You simply give. You don't even expect gratitude or thankfulness because you are not giving to get anything, not even gratitude. You are giving because you are so full you have to give.
So I will not tell you to do anything about your loneliness. Look for your aloneness. Forget loneliness, forget darkness, forget pain. These are just the absence of aloneness, and the experience of aloneness will dispel them instantly.
And the method is the same: just watch your mind, be aware. Become more and more conscious, so finally you are only conscious of yourself. That is the point where you become aware of aloneness.
And always look to see if anything that you are facing as a problem is a negative thing or a positive thing. If it is a negative thing then don't fight with it; don't bother about it at all. Just look for the positive of it, and you will be at the right door. Most of the people in the world miss because they start fighting directly with the negative door. There is no door; there is only darkness, there is only absence.
So before you face a problem, just look at it—is it an absence of something? And the truth is that all your problems are the absence of something. Once you have found what they are the absence of, then go after the positive. The moment you find the positive you have found the light, and the darkness is finished.
Why is it I feel fully alive only when I am in love? I tell myself that I should be able to spark myself without the other, but so far no luck. Is this some stupid game I am playing? The first meeting happened, but the president never turned up. They were all worried. They rushed to his home and they asked him, "What is the matter? Have you forgotten?"
He said, "No, but my wife won't allow me. She says, 'You go out, and I will never allow you back in!' Of course risk I cannot take."
The man has reduced the woman to a slave and the woman has reduced the man to a slave. And of course both hate the slavery, both resist it. They are constantly fighting; any small excuse and the fight starts. But the real fight is somewhere else deep down; the real fight is that they are asking for freedom.
You say: "I tell myself that I should be able to spark myself without the other, but so far no luck." It will remain so, it will not change. You should rather change your conditioning about love and freedom. Love the person, but give the person total freedom. Love the person, but from the very beginning make it clear that you are not selling your freedom.
And if you cannot make it happen in this community, here with me, you cannot make it happen anywhere else. Here we are experimenting with many things, and one of the dimensions of our experiment is to make love and freedom possible together, to support their coexistence together. Love a person but don't possess, and don't be possessed

The text provided is a transcript from the book "Love and Freedom" by Osho. In this passage, Osho discusses how society conditions humans to be utilities rather than individuals with unique needs and desires. He emphasizes the importance of unconditioning the mind through meditation in order to see the beauty of love and freedom together. Additionally, he highlights the fear of being alone that many people experience due to their conditioned identities and false sense of self.

habit—.”
But then they started looking, and they found that things were not stolen.
Somebody’s money was missing but it was found in somebody else's bag.
Somebody else's coat was missing but it was found in somebody else's luggage.
Everything was found, but it was an unnecessary trouble—every morning! And nobody could conceive what can be the meaning of it? Certainly it is not the thief, because nothing was actually stolen.
The third night, Eknath remained awake to see what was going on. In the middle of the night, the thief—just out of habit—woke up, started taking things from one place to another place. Eknath stopped him and said, “What are you doing? Have you forgotten your promise?”
He said, “No, I have not forgotten my promise. I am not stealing anything, but I have not promised that I will not move things from one place to another place. After six months I have to be a thief again; this is just practice. And you must understand, it is a lifelong habit, you cannot drop it just like that. Just give me time. You should understand my problem also. For three days I have not stolen a single thing—it is just like fasting! This is just a substitute, I am keeping myself busy. This is my business time, in the middle of the night, so it is very hard for me just to lie down on the bed awake. And so many idiots are sleeping and I am not doing any harm to anybody. In the morning they will find their things.”
Eknath said, “You are a strange man. You see that every morning there is such chaos, and one or two hours unnecessarily are wasted in finding where you have put things, whose property has gone into whose luggage. Everybody has to open everything and ask everybody… ‘To whom does this belong?’”
The thief said, “This much concession you have to give to me.”
Twenty-six years of a false personality imposed by people who you loved, whom you respected, and they were not intentionally doing anything bad to you. Their intentions were good, just their awareness was nil. They were against searching. You were born. You have come into the world with life, with consciousness, with tremendous sensitivity. Just look at a small child. Look at his eyes, the freshness. All that has been covered by a false personality. There is no need to be afraid. You can lose only that which needs to be lost. And it is good to lose it soon, because the longer it stays, the stronger it becomes, and one does not know anything about tomorrow. Don't die before realizing your authentic being. Only those few people are fortunate who have lived with authentic being and who have died with authentic being because they know that life is eternal, and death is a fiction.

Sometimes it takes a long time for boundaries to disappear, as if the other does not exist at all, and the whole universe exists only for you. In that moment of aloneness, one realizes what infinity is. But then, if you live in it too much, by degrees the infinity bores you. There is purity and silence, but there is no ecstasy in it. Ecstasy always comes through the other. One then starts feeling hungry for love, and wants to escape from this aloneness, this vast expanse of space. This is the basic polarity of life, love and meditation. People who try to live through love and relationships alone become very limited. They lose infinity and purity, and they become superficial. Always living in relationships means always living on the boundary where you can meet the other. So you are always standing at the gate, and you can never move into your palace, because only at the gate is the meeting-point where the other passes by. People who only live in love become superficial. Their life loses depth. And people who live only in meditation will become very deep, but their life loses color, loses the ecstatic dance, the orgasmic quality of being. Real humanity, the humanity of the future, will live with both polarities together, and to share that understanding is my whole effort. One should be free to move from one to another, with neither polarity becoming a confinement. You should not be afraid of the marketplace, nor too afraid of the monastery.

Freedom, and he can enjoy freedom. And in the right moment, when you start missing each other, he's back. Just wait! And he's not a dangerous person; he cannot harm you. He's very good at heart, just a little loose in his head. But to have a boyfriend who is a little loose in the head is better than having a boyfriend who is a little tight in the head. I know it's no ordinary relationship: you both are extraordinary. SOUL MATES OR CELL MATES?

We are all living lives according to fictions, poetries, film stories. That has given humanity a wrong impression, the impression that when there is love everything will fit, that there will be no conflict. For centuries poets have been giving the idea that lovers are made for each other. Nobody is made for anybody else. Everybody is different from everybody else. You may love a person without knowing that you love the person only because there is so much difference between you, so much distance. The distance is a challenge, the distance is an adventure; the distance makes the woman or the man worth getting hold of. But things as they appear from a distance are not the same when they come close.

When you are just courting a man or a woman, everything is beautiful, everything fits because both want everything to fit. Anything that does not fit is not allowed to surface; it is repressed in the unconscious. So lovers sitting on the beach looking at the moon do not know each other at all. The marriage is almost finished before the honeymoon is finished.

In the East where the tradition of arranged marriage is still followed, there is nothing like a honeymoon; they don't give the chance for the marriage to be finished so soon. Couples go on living together and never feel that things are not fitting, that something is missing. There is no chance at all for that to happen. Husbands and wives do not choose for themselves; marriages are organized by the parents, by the astrologers, by all kinds of people except the two who are going to be married.

Even after they get married, the couple cannot see each other alone in the daylight, they can only meet each other deep in the darkness of the night. They have their own ideas, you have your own ideas; she respects your ideas, you respect her ideas; she has her way, you have your own way and nobody is trying to impose on and indoctrinate the other. Then there is no question of fight. And then there is no question that things are not fitting. Why should they be fitting?

Why should there be any feeling that something is missing? Nothing is missing; it is just that your idea of harmony is not there. Harmony is not something very great, it is boring. Once in a while, even if you fight, even if you get really hot, that does not mean love disappears; that simply means love is capable of absorbing even disagreements, fights, overcoming all these hindrances. But the old ideology gets in the way of your understanding.

I am reminded of the old biblical story which is not told very much because it is very dangerous. First, God made one man and one woman. But as you know by looking at the world, God does not seem to be very intelligent. Here, nothing is fitting; from the very beginning you can see it. He made man and woman, two persons, and gave them a small bed, not a double bed.

The very first night was the night of a tremendous fight because the woman wanted to sleep on the bed. The man thought that he should sleep on the bed and she should sleep on the floor. The whole night they went on fighting, hitting each other, throwing things, and in the morning the man said to God, "I asked you to give me a companion but I did not ask you to give me an enemy." If this is your idea of a companion, then I want to tell you I was better off alone. I don't want this woman; there is never going to be peace between us."

Now the simple thing would have been to ask for a double bed. I don't understand what kind of God that was, and what these idiots were asking. The simple solution was a double bed, or two single beds if things were getting that bad. But instead of that Adam said, "I don't want this woman; she is trying to be equal to me." The male chauvinist idea arose that very night.

So God dismantled the woman—naturally, because God is also a male chauvinist. Her name was Lilith. He dismantled her just the way you dismantle any mechanism. He destroyed the woman and said, "Now I will make another woman who will be lower than you and will never ask for equality." Then he made the second woman, who was Eve, by taking one of the ribs from Adam.

It is said that every night when Adam would come back home and go to sleep, Eve would count his ribs because she was always afraid that if he lost another rib, that would mean another woman was also somewhere around.

There is no need for more than friendship. Love has to be a friendly affair in which nobody is superior, in which nobody is going to decide about things, in which both are fully aware that they are different, that their approach towards life is different, that they think differently, and still, with all these differences, they love each other. Then you will not find any problems. Problems are created by us.

Don't try to create something superhuman. Be human, accept the other person's humanity with all the frailty humanity is prone to. Your partner will commit mistakes just as you commit mistakes

The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts. Repair it into clean, readable English. Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
mistakes,	and	you	have	to	learn.	To	be
together	is	a	great	learning:	of	forgiving,	forgetting,	understanding	that	the	other
is	as	human	as	you	are.	Just	a	little	forgiveness.
There	is	an	old	proverb:	“To	err	is	human	and	to	forgive	is	divine.”	I	don’t
agree.	To	err	is	human	and	to	forgive	is	also	human.	To	forgive	is	divine?—then
you	are	raising	it	too	high,	beyond	human	reach.	Bring	it	within	human	reach
and	learn	to	forgive.	Learn	to	enjoy	forgiveness,	learn	to	offer	an	apology;	you
don’t	lose	anything	when	you	can	say	to	your	partner,	“I’m	sorry,	I	was	wrong.”
But	nobody	wants	to	say,	“I	was	wrong.”	You	want	to	be	always	right.	The
man	tries	to	prove	through	arguments	that	he	is	right,	and	the	woman	tries
through	emotions	to	prove	that	she	is	right.	This	is	a	very	difficult	situation
for	both.
If	you	are	just	friendly	and	don’t	make	your	friendliness	a	legal	affair	of
husband	and	wife,	things	will	be	far	better	because	then	you	are	not	a	burden	to
anybody,	not	a	bondage.	There	will	be	no	question	of	having	to	fit	with	each
other.	You	can	have	your	individuality	totally	free	from	each	other,	and	yet	be	in
love.
And	 really	 to	 be	 totally	 different	 in	 your	 individuality	 creates	 the	 best
possibility	of	love.
Whenever	I	am	in	love	with	a	man,	for	that	time	no	other	man
attracts	me.	But	for	the	man,	it’s	not	the	same.	Though	he	is	happy
and	satisfied,	and	wants	to	keep	the	relationship	with	me,	he	has	his
short	 love	 affairs	 every	 few	 months.	 I	 understand	 the	 different
nature	of	man	and	woman.	I	also	understand	every	love	relationship
has	its	peaks	and	valleys.	Still,	sadness	in	me	keeps	on	coming.	I	give
a	long	rope	to	the	man.	My	friends	say	I	make	myself	so	available
that	I	let	the	man	take	me	for	granted	and	I	lose	my	self-respect.	I’m
not	clear.	I	don’t	expect	anything	from	him.	Would	you	please	like	to
comment?

Is polygamy the way for man? Women made the rules of monogamy by creating prostitutes. In the past it was thought natural for men to visit prostitutes, but in reality both partners are polygamous. The entire existence is polygamous; monogamy is boring. However, beauty can become tiring, and the same geography or topography can also be monotonous. How long do you have to see the same face? So it happens that years pass and the husband has not looked attentively at his wife for a single moment. In the new world, there should be no marriage, only lovers. If both are pleased to be together they can be together; if they feel they have been together too long, a little change will be good. There is no question of sadness or anger, just deep acceptance of nature. And if you have loved a man or woman, you will want to give the other person as much freedom as possible. If love cannot give freedom, then it is not love.

Yes, I can see that," said the woman, "but the ad also said I wanted a 'fantastic lover.'" The man smiles and says, "I rang the doorbell, didn't I?" Although I am deeply satisfied and nourished by my regular food, still from time to time I feel a strong pull towards other dishes, and enjoy Italian pizzas, French wine, or Japanese sushi. It's not that I don't want to eat out occasionally, but I'd like to feel it is in my hands whether I do or not, and not be a victim of this hormonal conspiracy. Can you please give me a clue how to go beyond these biological pulls? If one allows nature without any inhibitions to take its own course, one transcends biology, body, mind, without any effort. But we are full of inhibitions. Even the so-called young people, who think that they have disowned and repressed their inhibitions, are in a very subtle way repressive. If you are repressive then you cannot transcend biological pulls naturally, without any effort. So, the first thing to be remembered is that nature is right. All the old traditions have been telling you that nature is not right. You have to divide nature into right and wrong. But nature is indivisible. So while you are dividing it, you are simply making an impossible effort. The whole of nature has to be accepted with great joy and gratitude. Biology is not your bondage but a certain stage of growth. Life taken with insight and understanding helps you to go beyond itself without asking you for any discipline, any effort, any arduous conflict. We are children of nature. But all the religions have created one thing certainly: a divided mind, a schizophrenic man who is pulled in two directions. They have all given you moralities. The natural man needs no morality. Accept it, but don't keep it a secret from your lover. Don't let her down. Don't make her feel that she is not enough for you. Say to her, "You are too satisfying and my mind wants a little change of atmosphere, some excitement so that I can feel that I am still alive." And remember, whatever you take for yourself, you have to give her too. It has not to be one-sided, not that only you go to the pizza place or find a Chinese restaurant; you allow her also. The woman has become aware of orgasm only in the last century and the whole credit goes to the movement of psychoanalysis. In the more traditional Eastern countries, 98 percent of women are still unaware that there is anything in making love, because she gets no juice, no experience. She in fact hates the whole affair. Ejaculation is not her need, it is man's need; but both have remained deprived of sex and its ultimate orgasmic experiences. But the trouble is, how to manage it? Anything looks very immoral. Either you have to invite all your friends, so that five or six friends make love, one by one, to the woman.

Oman then she will be satisfied but that looks very hurting to the ego. Or you have to provide her with an electric vibrator. But once she knows the vibrator, you are useless because the vibrator gives her such tremendous orgasmic experiences that you cannot give. It seems there has been some mistake by nature itself: men and women are not equal in their orgasmic capacity. You are fully satisfied but have you ever bothered whether your beloved has found even a single orgasm? Because she has not found a single orgasm, she can remain devoted to you, monogamous. But if she knows what orgasmic experience is, she will also want, once in a while, to be with another man. If you really love your woman, you will help her to come out of her old conditionings, which are far deeper because man himself is responsible. Man himself does not have those conditionings; his morality is very superficial and a hypocrisy. But the woman's morality has gone very deep. Man has been enforcing it from the very childhood. If you feel to change it, it is your responsibility; and particularly a man of your understanding should be able to see what I am saying. It is your responsibility to bring Neelam also out into the sun, into the rain, into the wind, so that she can drop all her conditionings. You have to help her; you have to teach her how to enjoy the pizza place, and not go on eating Punjabi food her whole life. How to enjoy Japanese food or Chinese food? If men and women really love each other, they will help each other to be unconditioned from the past. Man does not have many conditionings, and they are superficial. He can drop them very easily, the way you drop your clothes. The woman has been conditioned so much that it is not like dropping her clothes, it is like peeling her skin. It is hard, and unless you really love a woman you will not be able to help much. It will be very difficult on her own to get rid of all those deep rooted conceptions. Love lived in an atmosphere of freedom will transcend sex naturally, easily, effortlessly. Love will remain, sex will be gone, and then love has a purity and a beauty and a sacredness of its own. Sitting on a bus in New York, a prim old lady was shocked to overhear an Italian say to another, "Emma come-a first. I come-a next. Two ass-a come-a together. I come-a again. Two ass-a come-a together again. I come-a once more. Peepee twice. Then I come-a for the last time." When the Italian was finished, the red-faced old maid turned to a policeman sitting nearby and said, "Are you not going to arrest that terrible old man?" "What for?" asked the policeman. "For spelling Missisippi?" Take life more joyously and more jokingly. Let your whole life become a beautiful joke. There is nothing wrong in nature, and to be natural is to be religious. You both are intelligent, and I hope that you will prove my hypothesis that you can love each other, and yet once in a while have different affairs - joyously, not reluctantly. Not because I am saying it, but out of your own understanding. Sex is a subtle subject, delicate, because centuries of exploitation, corruption, centuries of perverted ideas and conditioning are associated with the word "sex." The very word creates confusion, chaos. Humanity has lived under the influence of very wrong ideas. So the first thing to consider is, why do you ask how to go beyond your sexual feelings? Why do you want in the first place to transcend your sexuality? You are using a beautiful term - "go beyond" - but out of a hundred possibilities, ninety-nine are that you mean, "How to repress my sexual feelings?" A person who has understood that sex can be transcended is not even worried about going beyond it, because transcendence comes through experience. You cannot manage it. It is not something that you have to do. You simply pass through many experiences, and those experiences make you more and more mature. Have you watched that at a certain age, sex becomes important? Not that you

Ogdates have been opened in you. Subtle sources of energy that were not open before have become open, and your whole energy becomes sexual, colored with sex. You think sex, you sing sex, you walk sex-everything becomes sexual. Every act is colored. This happens; you have not done anything about it. It is natural. And transcendence is also natural. If sex is lived totally, with no condemnation, with no idea of getting rid of it, then at the age of forty-two-just as at the age of fourteen the door to sex gets opened and the whole energy becomes sexual, at the age of forty-two or near about-those floodgates start to close again. And that too is as natural as sex becoming alive; it starts disappearing. Sexuality is transcended not by any effort on your part. If you make any effort that will be repressive, because it has nothing to do with you. It is inbuilt-in your body, in your biology. You are born as sexual beings; nothing is wrong in it. That is the only way to be born. To be human is to be sexual. When you were conceived, your mother and your father were not praying, they were not listening to some priest's sermon. They were not in church, they were making love. Even to think that your mother and father were making love when you were conceived seems to be difficult, I know, but they were making love; their sexual energies were meeting and merging into each other. Then you were conceived; in that deep sexual act you were conceived. The first cell was a sexual cell, and then out of that cell other cells have arisen. But each cell remains sexual, basically. Your whole body is sexual, made of sex cells. Now they are millions. Remember it: you exist as a sexual being. Once you accept it, the conflict that has been there since your childhood starts dissolving. So the real thing is not how to transcend sex but how to transcend this perverted ideology of the society-this fear of sex, this repression of sex, this obsession with sex. Sex is beautiful. Sex in itself is a natural, rhythmic phenomenon. It happens when the child is ready to be conceived, and it is good that it happens; otherwise life would not exist. Life exists through sex; sex is its medium. If you understand life, if you love life, you will know that sex is sacred, holy. Then you live it, then you delight in it; and as naturally as it has come into being, it goes of its own accord. But it does not happen that way. Instead, you will be surprised when I say forty-two. You know people who are seventy, eighty, and yet they have not gone beyond their obsession with sex. You know "dirty old men." They are victims of the society because they could not be natural. It is a hangover, because they repressed their sexuality when they should have enjoyed and delighted in it. In those moments of sexual delight they were not totally in it. They were half-hearted. Whenever you are half-hearted in anything, it lingers longer. If you are sitting at your table and eating, and if you eat only half-heartedly, then your hunger will remain. Then you will continue to think about food the whole day. You can try fasting and you will see: you will continuously think about food! But if you have eaten well, and when I say that, I don't mean only that you have stuffed your stomach. Then it is not necessarily the case that you have eaten well.

ll. You might have stuffed yourself, but eating well is an art. It is not just stuffing yourself; it is a great art—to taste the food, to smell the food, to touch it, chew it, to digest it and to digest it as divine. It is divine; it is a gift. Hindus say, Anam Brahma, food is divine, a gift from God. With deep respect you eat, and while eating you forget everything else, because eating is prayer. It is existential prayer. You are eating God, and God is going to give you nourishment. It is a gift to be accepted with deep love and gratitude. And you don't stuff the body, because stuffing the body is being antagonistic to the body. There are people who are obsessed with fasting, and there are people who are obsessed with stuffing themselves. Both are wrong, because in both ways the body loses balance. A real lover of the body eats only to the point where the body feels perfectly quiet, balanced, tranquil; where the body feels to be neither leaning to the left nor to the right, but just in the middle. It is an art to understand the language of the body, to understand the language of your stomach, to understand what is needed and to give only that which is needed, and to give that in an artistic way, in an aesthetic way. Animals eat, man eats—what is the difference? Man makes a great, aesthetic experience out of eating. What is the point of having a beautiful dining table? What is the point of having candles burning there? What is the point of asking friends to come and participate? It is to make it an art, not just stuffing yourself. But these are outward signs of the art; the inward signs are to understand the language of your body and to listen to it, to be sensitive to its needs. Then you eat, and the whole day you will not think of food at all. Only when the body is hungry again does the hunger return. Sex is the only energy that gives you hints that there is something that you cannot control. Money you can control, politics you can control, the market you can control, knowledge you can control, science, morality, all these things you can control. Somewhere, sex brings in a totally different world; you cannot control it. And the ego is a great controller. It is happy if it can control; it is unhappy if it cannot control. So there is a conflict between the ego and sex. Remember, it is a losing battle. The ego cannot win it because ego is just superficial. Sex is very deep-rooted. Sex has roots all over you; ego has roots only in your ideas—very superficial, just in the head. So who is trying to go beyond biological, sexual attraction? The head is trying to control sex. If you are too much in the head then you want to go beyond your sexual feelings because sex brings you down to the guts. It does not allow you to remain hanging in the head. Everything else you can manage from there; sex you cannot manage from there. You cannot make love with your head. You have to come down, you have to descend from your heights, you have to come closer to earth. Sex is humiliating to the ego, so egoistic people are always against sex. They go on finding ways and means to transcend it. They can never transcend it. They can at the most become perverted. The whole effort from the very beginning is doomed to failure. I have heard: A boss was interviewing applicants to replace his private secretary who was resigning because of expectant motherhood. The first girl was a beautiful, buxom blond. She turned out to be intelligent and had excellent secretarial skills. The second was a dark-haired beauty who was even more intelligent and proficient than the first. The third one was cross-eyed, had buck teeth, weighed one hundred and ninety pounds, and had almost no skills. After interviewing all three candidates, the boss informed his associate that he was hiring the third applicant. "But why?" asked the astonished employee. "Well," boomed the boss, "in the first place, she looks very intelligent to me! In the second place, it is none of your damned business, and in the third place, she is my wife's sister." So you may pretend that you have won over sex, but an undercurrent remains. You may rationalize, you may find reasons, you may pretend, you may create a hard shell around you, but deep down the real reason, the reality, will stand untouched: "She is my wife's sister"—that is the real reason. "She looks intelligent"—that is just a rationalization. "And it is none of your damned business"—that is being annoyed and irritated because you are afraid that the other may find out the real case! But the real case will explode no matter what you do; you cannot hide it, it is not possible. So you can try to control sex, but an undercurrent of sexuality will run through your being, and it will show itself in many ways. Out of all your rationalizations, it will again and again raise its head. I will not suggest that you make any effort to go beyond your sexuality. What I suggest is just the contrary: forget about going beyond it. Move into it as deeply as you can. While the energy is there, move as deeply as you can, love as deeply as you can, and make an art of it. It is not just to be "done." That is the whole meaning of Tantra, making an art of lovemaking. There are subtle nuances,

There is a conflict between the ego and sex. Remember, it is a losing battle. The ego cannot win it because ego is just superficial. Sex is very deep-rooted. Sex has roots all over you; ego has roots only in your ideas—very superficial, just in the head. So who is trying to go beyond biological, sexual attraction? The head is trying to control sex. If you are too much in the head then you want to go beyond your sexual feelings because sex brings you down to the guts. It does not allow you to remain hanging in the head. Everything else you can manage from there; sex you cannot manage from there. You cannot make love with your head. You have to come down, you have to descend from your heights, you have to come closer to earth. Sex is humiliating to the ego, so egoistic people are always against sex. They go on finding ways and means to transcend it. They can never transcend it. They can at the most become perverted. The whole effort from the very beginning is doomed to failure.

which only people who enter with a great aesthetic sense will be able to know. Otherwise, you can make love for your whole life and still remain unsatisfied because you don’t know that real satisfaction is something very aesthetic. It is like a subtle music arising in your soul. If through sex you fall into harmony, if through love you become non-tense and relaxed, if love is not just throwing out energy because you don’t know what else to do with it, if it is not just a relief but a relaxation, if you relax into your partner and your partner relaxes into you, if for a few seconds, for a few moments or a few hours you forget who you are and you are completely lost in oblivion, you will come out of it purer, more innocent, more virgin. And you will have a different type of being: at ease, centered, rooted.
If this happens, one day suddenly you will see that the flood has gone and it has left you very, very rich. You will not be sorry that it has gone. You will be thankful, because now richer worlds open. When sex leaves you, the doors of meditation open. When sex leaves you, then you are not trying to lose yourself in the other. You become capable of losing yourself in yourself. Now another world of orgasm, inner orgasm, of being with oneself arises. But that arises only through being with the other. One grows, matures through the other. Then a moment comes when you can be alone, tremendously happy. There is no need for any other. The need has disappeared but you have learned.
Each thing has its own right time. Each thing has to be done in its moment. While young, don’t be afraid of love, and don’t be afraid of sex. If you are afraid while you are young, in old age you will become obsessed; and then it will be difficult to move deeply into love, and the mind will remain obsessed. It is my understanding that people, if they have lived rightly, lovingly, naturally, then by the forty-second year they start going beyond sex. If they have not lived naturally and they have been fighting with sex, then forty-two becomes their most dangerous time—because by the time they are forty-two their energies are declining. When you are young you can repress something because young people have the energy to repress it. They can just put it down and sit on it. When the energies are declining, then that repressed sexuality will assert itself and you will not be able to control it.
I have heard an anecdote: A sixty-five-year-old man visited the office of his son, who was a doctor, and asked for something that would increase his sexual potential. The son gave his father a shot, and then refused to accept a fee. Nevertheless, the old man insisted on giving him ten dollars. “But Pop, the shots are only ten dollars.” “Take it!” said Stein. “The extra ten is from Momma.” That will continue. So before that happens to you, please be finished with it. Don’t wait for old age, because then things go ugly. Then everything goes out of season.
I know my love stinks, so why do I cling to the smell? We live according to the past. Our lives are rooted in the dead past, we are conditioned by the past. The past is very powerful, that’s why you go on living in a certain pattern; even if it stinks, you will go on repeating it. You don’t know what else to do, you have become conditioned to it. It is just an intellectual idea, because each time you are in it.

Love sometimes arises and brings with it some misery. Each time there is a conflict or struggle, a fight or jealousy, possessiveness comes into play. You have started taking an intellectual standpoint: "My love stinks, so why do I cling to the smell?" Because it is not yet really an existential experience for you. And it is your own smell! One becomes accustomed to one's own smell. That's why when people are alone they don't experience that smell, they only experience it when they are together with somebody else. When you are in love then you start showing your real face. Love is a mirror. The other starts functioning as a mirror. Every relationship becomes a mirror. Alone, you don't experience your own smell, you can't; one becomes immune to it. You have lived with it so long, how can you smell it? It is only with the other that you start feeling that he stinks and he starts feeling that you stink. And the fight starts. That is the story of all the couples all over the world. "Where are you going with that goat, Juan?" asked the policeman. "I'm taking him home to keep as a pet!" replied Juan. "But what about the smell?" "So what? He ain't gonna mind the smell!" Your own smell is not disturbing to you. In fact, if it suddenly disappears you will feel a little jolted, you will feel a little uprooted. You will not feel like your natural self; you will feel something has gone wrong.

, you will undo it; because all doing is mundane. Very few people come to know the secret of non-doing and allowing things to happen. If you want great things—things that are beyond the small reach of human hands, human mind, human abilities—then you will have to learn the art of non-doing. I call it meditation.

It is a trouble, because the moment you give a name to it, immediately people start asking how to "do" it. And you cannot say that they are wrong, because the very word "meditation" creates the idea of doing. They have their doctorate, they have done a thousand and one things; when they hear the word "meditation" they ask, "So just tell us how to do it?" Meditation basically means the beginning of non-doing, relaxing, going with the tide—just being a leaf in the breeze, or a cloud moving with the winds.

Never ask a cloud, "Where are you going?" He himself does not know; he has no address, he has no destiny. If the winds change he was going to the south, he starts moving towards the north. The cloud does not say to the winds, "This is absolutely illogical. We were moving south, now we are moving north. What is the point of it all?" No, he simply starts moving north as easily as he was moving south. To him, south, north, east, west, don't make any difference. Just to move with the wind, with no desire, with no goal, nowhere to reach; he is just enjoying the journey. Meditation makes you a cloud—of consciousness. Then windows will start opening in you, windows that will connect you with the universal, the immortal.

It feels to me that much of my own "doing" is to avoid boredom. Can you talk about the nature of the experiences we call boredom and restlessness? Boredom and restlessness are deeply related. Whenever you feel bored, then you feel restlessness. Restlessness is a by-product of boredom. Try to understand the mechanism. Whenever you feel bored you want to move away from that situation. If someone is saying something and you are getting bored, you start becoming fidgety. Of course, out of politeness you suppress it, but the body is already on the move because the body is more authentic than the mind, the body is more honest and sincere than the mind. The mind is trying to be polite, smiling. You say, "How interesting!" but inside you are saying, "How boring! I have listened to enough."

This story has been told so many times and you are telling it again! I have heard a story about Albert Einstein's wife. Friends of Albert Einstein would come to visit, and of course Einstein would always tell some anecdotes, some jokes, and they would laugh. But one friend became curious; he noticed that whenever he came and Einstein started telling stories, Frau Einstein would immediately start knitting or doing something. So he asked her, "The moment your husband starts telling some story or some joke, why do you start knitting?" She said, "If I don't do anything, it will be tremendously difficult for me to tolerate because I have heard those stories and jokes a thousand and one times. You come to visit sometimes, I am always here. Whenever anybody comes he tells the same jokes, the same stories. If I didn't do something with my hands, I would become so fidgety that it would be impolite. So I have to move my restlessness into some work. Then I can hide my fidgetiness behind the work."

Whenever you feel bored, you will feel restless. Restlessness is an indication of the body; the body is saying, "Move away from here. Go anywhere, but don't be here." But the mind goes on smiling, and the eyes go on sparkling, and you go on saying that you are listening and you have never heard such an interesting story. The mind is civilized; the body is still wild. The mind is human; the body is still animal. The mind knows the rules and regulations, how to behave and how not to behave. So even if you meet a bore, you say, "I am so happy, so glad to see you!" And deep down, if you were allowed, you would kill this person.

A marriage is almost finished by the time the honeymoon is over, then you go on pretending. But behind those pretensions, a deep boredom accumulates. Almost always people die without ever having been alive. Bertrand Russell is reported to have said, "When I think back, I cannot find more than a few moments in my life when I was really alive, aflame." Can you remember how many moments in your life you were really aflame? Rarely does it happen. One dreams about those moments, one imagines those moments, one hopes for those moments, but they almost never happen. Even if they do happen, sooner or later they also become repetitive.

What to do then? Become more conscious. It is not a question of changing situations. Transform your being, become more conscious.

us you will be able to see that each moment is new. But for that, much energy, a tremendous energy of consciousness is needed. The wife is not the same, remember. You are in an illusion. Go back home and look again at your wife—she is not the same. Nobody can be the same; just appearances deceive. The trees are not the same as they were yesterday. How can they be? They have grown. Many leaves have fallen, new leaves have come. Look at the tree on your street—how many new leaves have come? Every day the old are falling and the new are coming. But you are not that conscious. Either have no consciousness, then you cannot feel the repetition, or, have so much consciousness that in each repetition you can see something new. These are the two ways to get out of boredom. Changing outside things is not going to help. It is just like rearranging the furniture in your room again and again. Whatever you do, you can put it this way or that way, it is the same furniture. There are many people who continuously think about how to manage things, where to put things, how to arrange them, where not to put them, and they go on changing things according to their ideas. But it is the same room, it is the same furniture. How long will you be able to deceive yourself in this way? By and by everything settles, the newness disappears. You don't have a quality of consciousness that can go on finding the new again and again. We always live with dead expectations. Every day we come home and we expect certain behavior from our partner. Now look how we create our own misery: we expect a certain fixed behavior from our partner, and then we want our partner to be new? We are asking the impossible! If you really want your wife, your husband, your partner to remain continuously new to you, don't expect. Come home always ready to be surprised and shocked, then the other will be new. But instead, we expect the other to behave in a certain way, and of course, each of them manages the roles. We are not living life, we are living roles. The husband comes home, he forces himself into a certain role. By the time he enters the house, he is no longer an alive person, he is just a husband. A husband means a certain type of expected behavior. At home, the woman is a wife and the man is a husband. Now when these two persons meet, there are really four persons: the husband and wife, who are not real persons but just personas, masks, false patterns, expected behavior, duties, and all that, and the real persons hiding behind the masks. Those real persons feel bored. But you have invested much in your persona, in your mask. If you really want a life that has no boredom in it, drop all masks, be true. Sometimes it will be difficult, I know, but it is worth it. Be true. If you feel like loving your wife, love her; otherwise say you don't feel like it. What is happening right now is that the husband goes on making love to the wife, thinking of some actress. In his imagination he is not making love to this woman, he is making love to some other woman. And the same is true about the wife. Then things become boring because they are no longer alive. The intensity, the sharpness, is lost. It happened on a railway platform. Mr. Johnson had weighed himself on one of those old-fashioned penny machines that delivers a card with a fortune printed on it. The formidable Mrs. Johnson plucked it from her husband's fingers and said, "Let me see that." Oh, it says you are firm and resolute, have a decisive personality, are a leader of men, and are attractive to women." Then she turned over the card, studied it for a moment, and said, "And they have got the weight wrong as well." And no woman can tolerate it if her husband is attracted to other women. There is the whole point, the whole crux. If he is not attracted to other women, how can she expect that he will be attracted to her? If he is attracted to other women, only then can he be attracted to her, because she is also a woman. The wife wants him to look at any other woman with a loving eye." Of course you manage to control yourself, because if you don't it creates chaos. Love has to be a way of life. You are to be loving. Only then can you love your wife or your husband. But the wife says, "No, you should not look at anybody else with a loving eye." And of course we manage to control ourselves, because if we don't it creates chaos. We want our partner to fulfill certain expectations. And we are the ones who manage the roles.

Tes such nuisance, but by and by the glimmer in your eyes disappears. If you cannot look anywhere else with love, by and by you cannot look at your own wife with love. The capacity disappears. And the same has happened to her. The same has happened to the whole of humanity. Then life is a boredom; then everybody is just waiting for death; then there are people constantly thinking of committing suicide. Marcel has said somewhere that the only metaphysical problem facing humanity is suicide. And it is so, because people are so bored. It is simply amazing more people don't commit suicide, how they go on living. Life doesn't seem to give anything, all meaning seems to be lost, but still people go on dragging somehow, hoping that some day some miracle will happen and everything will be put right.

You have to put it right; nobody else is going to put it right for you. No Messiah is going to come, don't wait for one. You have to be a light unto yourself. Live more authentically. Drop the masks; they are a weight on your heart. Drop all falsities. Be exposed. Of course it is going to be troublesome, but that trouble is worth it because only after that trouble will you grow and become mature. And then nothing is holding back life. Each moment life reveals its newness, it is a constant miracle happening all around you, only you are hiding behind dead habits.

Become a buddha if you don't want to be bored. Live each moment as fully alert as possible, because only in full alertness will you be able to drop the mask. You have completely forgotten what your original face is. Even when you stand before the mirror in your bathroom and you are alone, nobody is there. Even standing before the mirror you don't see your original face in the mirror. There too, you go on deceiving yourself.

Existence is available for those who are available to existence. And then, I tell you, there is no boredom. Life is infinite delight. Would you please talk more about what you mean by intimacy? Particularly, when is staying together through difficult times in a relationship positive and when is it negative?

The positive relationship will face real problems. If you are really intimate with your partner, how can you avoid the fact that you become interested in another person? You have to say it. That's part of love, part of intimacy. You expose yourself totally and you don't hold anything back. Even if during the night you start talking to your girlfriend in your sleep, and you are saying such beautiful things, your wife wakes up. She starts staring at you, listening hard to what you are saying. When you are married, even in your dreams you remain afraid of your wife, so suddenly he woke up and became afraid. What was he saying? He felt his wife looking at him and with great presence of mind he pretended that he was still asleep!

And without opening his eyes to give any indication that he was awake, he said, "Cut! Now to the next scene," as if he was directing a film! If you really love the woman, in the morning you will tell her your dream, that you made love to another woman in the night in your dream. Everything has to be shared. The whole heart has to be shared. Intimacy means that there is no privacy. You don't carry anything private now, at least with the person you are intimate with, you drop your privacy. You are nude and naked-good, bad, whatsoever you are, you open your heart. And whatever the cost you pay for it; whatever the trouble you go through with it. That brings growth. And you help the other person also to drop all inhibitions, screens, masks. In an intimate relationship one comes to see the original face of the other and one comes to show one's own original face. If a relationship helps you to find your original face then it is meditative, then it is spiritual. If your relationship simply helps you to create more and more mask and hypocrisies then it is irreligious. Try to understand my definition. If my definition is understood then out of a hundred marriages ninety-nine are irreligious because they are simply creating more and more falsity. From the very beginning the falsity starts. I have heard: The minister, casting an appraising eye over the bridal couple before him and the goodly crowd come to witness the ceremony, intoned, "If there is anyone here who knows why these two should not be joined together in wedlock, let them speak now or forever hold their peace." But no one spoke. So he joined the couple together and they were married. And while they were enjoying their honeymoon a strange man entered their room with a knife in his hand and said, "I have killed your husband, I am the real husband of this woman." The bridegroom was terrified and ran away but the stranger said, "You are free to go now, I will not bother you anymore." And so the couple left and went on their way. And after they had traveled for some time the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is a magician." The couple were astonished at what they had heard and they said, "We don't believe you, we are not going to listen to you anymore." And so they left and went on their way again. But as they were walking along the road the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is a magician." The couple were astonished at what they had heard and they said, "We don't believe you, we are not going to listen to you anymore." And so they left and went on their way again. But as they were walking along the road the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is a magician." The couple were astonished at what they had heard and they said, "We don't believe you, we are not going to listen to you anymore." And so they left and went on their way again. But as they were walking along the road the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is a magician." The couple were astonished at what they had heard and they said, "We don't believe you, we are not going to listen to you anymore." And so they left and went on their way again. But as they were walking along the road the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is

For both of you - if you cannot create a beautiful space between you, then perhaps you are not born for each other. Give it a try, and beware of the fact that if you remain grumpy, your face continuously sad, then I am going to suggest that you part from each other. You are simply a nut. He is a very qualified person, a coconut - he will understand me. There is no need to lose hope. Give it a try, but this time make it a point that either your life becomes peaceful and joyous, or with peace and joy, you part from one another.

We are all strangers in the world. We meet suddenly, accidentally, on the road. It is good if we can help each other to be more authentic, more sincere, more loving; to be more meditative, to be more alert, to be more aware. Then our love relationship is a spiritual phenomenon. But if we are simply destroying each other, this is not even friendship; this is sheer enmity.

So you have to decide. You both sit together outside in the open - not in your room, because there the fight starts. Sit outside where everybody is passing by, so you cannot fight. Have a nice conversation. Lovers forget completely how to have a nice conversation; they all start speaking Marathi. Have you heard Marathi? I cannot conceive that you can love anybody, talking in Marathi; it always sounds like you are fighting. Just at the opposite pole is another language in India, Bengali - you cannot fight in it. Even if you are fighting, it looks as if you are having a beautiful conversation.

Have a good, decisive conversation, and follow a very simple rule: that we are together to help each other, not to destroy each other; to create each other, not to kill each other. Then everything is perfectly okay. Nothing is wrong in you, separately, and nothing is wrong in Om, separately. But together you suddenly both become warriors.

When I say that your love should be a let-go, a non-doing, a freedom, I mean that you cannot force love to stay; it comes and goes of its own accord. When you fell in love with someone, it was not you who decided it. Suddenly it happened; you could not have given a reason for why it happened. You can simply say, "I found myself being in love." Just remember the first meeting, and also remember how love comes; in the same way, it goes. One day, suddenly in the morning, you wake up and you find that the love has left. The husband is there, you are there, but something between you that was a bridge, a constant flow of energy, has disappeared. You are two, but you are alone and the other is alone. That "together" is no longer there, and the mystery that was keeping it together is not in your hands. You cannot force it to come back.

Millions of couples are doing that, hoping that perhaps it will come back, hoping that praying may help, going to church may help, getting somebody's blessings may help - but nothing is going to help. Even if in some way you can catch hold of the same man again, you will find that he is not the same man, and he will find that you are not the same woman. It is better to become strangers again. What is wrong in it? Back when you were strangers, nothing was wrong. Back when you did not know the woman, did not know the man, everything was good. Now again that has happened and you are again strangers. It is nothing new! You should have been aware from the very beginning that something mysterious came in. You did not bring it in. Naturally, it can go any moment and you cannot hold it back.

All depends on love. If it remains a long time, good. If it remains only for a few moments, that too is good because love is good. The length of it is meaningless. It is possible to have, in just a few minutes, more intensity of love than you can have in a few years. And that intensity will give you something of the unknown, which so many years will simply dilute. So the length is irrelevant, the depth is the only thing to be thought about.

While you are in love, be totally immersed in it. And when it is gone, say good-bye and be totally finished with it. Don't let the idea linger in your mind. There are many strangers available in the world - who knows? Love has left you simply so that you can find a better stranger.

Life's ways are strange. Trust life. You may find somebody who proves to be a tremendous love, and then you will see that your first love was nothing compared to it. And remember, some day this greater love can also disappear. But trust the life which has been giving you gifts again and again without your asking.

May look paradoxical to you, but it is an existential truth: only those people who are capable of being alone are capable of love, of sharing, of going into the deepest core of the other person—without possessing the other, without becoming dependent on the other, without reducing the other to a thing, and without becoming addicted to the other. They allow the other absolute freedom, because they know that if the other leaves, they will be as happy as they are now. Their happiness cannot be taken by the other. Then why do they want to be together? It is no longer a need; it is a luxury. Try to understand it. Real persons love each other as a luxury; it is not a need. They enjoy sharing: they have so much joy, they would like to pour it into somebody. And they know how to play their life as a solo instrument. The solo flute player knows how to enjoy his flute alone. And if he comes and finds a tabla player, a solo tabla player, they will enjoy being together and creating a harmony between the flute and the tabla. Both will enjoy it: they will both pour their richness into each other. Love is a verb; fear is only the absence of love. The problem with any absence is that you cannot do anything directly about it. Fear is like darkness. What can you do about darkness directly? You cannot drop it, you cannot throw it out, you cannot bring it in. There is no way to relate with darkness without bringing light in. The way to darkness goes via light. If you want darkness, put the light off; if you don't want darkness, put the light on. But you will have to do something with light, not with darkness at all. The same is true about love and fear: love is light, fear is darkness. The person who becomes obsessed with fear will never be able to resolve the problem. It is like wrestling with darkness: you are bound to be exhausted sooner or later, tired and defeated. And the miracle is, where is the fear? Even if you want to find it, you will not be able to find it at all. Love is not a relationship; love relates, but it is not a relationship. A relationship means something complete, finished, closed. Love is never a relationship; love is relating. It is always a river, flowing, unending. Love knows no full stop; the honeymoon begins but never ends. It is not like a novel that starts at a certain point and ends at a certain point.

guaranteed by the law, by the court, by the policeman. The guarantee will be inner. It will be a commitment from the heart, it will be a silent communion. If you enjoy being with somebody, you would like to enjoy it more and more. If you enjoy the intimacy, you would like to explore the intimacy more and more. And there are a few flowers of love that bloom only after long intimacies. There are seasonal flowers too; within six weeks they are there in the sun, but within six weeks again they are gone forever. There are flowers which take years to bloom, and there are flowers that keep blooming for many years to come. The longer it takes, the deeper it goes. But it has to be a commitment from one heart to another heart. It has not even to be verbalized, because to verbalize it is to profane it. It has to be a silent commitment: eye to eye, heart to heart, being to being. It has to be understood, not said. It is so ugly seeing people going to the church or the court to get married. It is so ugly, so inhuman. It simply shows they can't trust themselves, they trust the authorities more than they trust their own inner voice. It shows that because they can't trust their love, they trust the law. Forget relationships and learn how to relate. Once you are in a relationship, you start taking each other for granted. That's what destroys all love affairs. The woman thinks she knows the man, the man thinks he knows the woman. Nobody knows! It is impossible to know the other, the other remains a mystery. And to take the other for granted is insulting, disrespectful. To think that you know your partner is very ungrateful. How can you know the woman? How can you know the man? They are processes, they are not things. The woman that you knew yesterday is not there today. So much water has gone down the Ganges; she is somebody else, totally different. Relate again, start again, don't take it for granted. And the man who you slept with last night, look at his face again in the morning. He is no longer the same person, so much has changed. So much, incalculably much, has changed! That is the difference between a thing and a person. In fact the more you know, the more mysterious the other becomes. Then love is a constant adventure.

COUPLES COUNSELING
Insights for Living and Growing in Love
Editor's note: The following selections are taken from the evening meetings where Osho spoke directly with one or both partners in a couple, or with individuals who had come to ask him for insight into their problems in relationships.

When Telepathy Doesn't Work
It almost always happens that couples don't make things clear to each other. You hope that the other will understand, and the same is the case with the other: he or she thinks you will understand. Nobody understands! There is no communication, the problems have never been put forward clearly. You have to put things clearly: "I am not interfering with you, you can be who you are - I love you and I will go on loving you - but what about me?" Then some way can be found to work out the difficulties. You can remain together and still you can have your individuality and your freedom. If both partners really love each other, then they will be able to deal with the problem. But what really happens is that we never make things clear to each other. We go on hoping that the other will know telepathically. Nobody knows telepathically! The other is not a clairvoyant, you have to put it exactly: "two plus two is four" - like that. But what happens is that the real problem is not talked about.

Understanding the Need for Space
Create understanding, talk to each other, and understand that sometimes the other needs his space. And this is a problem: it may not happen at the same time for both of you. Sometimes you want to be with your partner, and he wants to be alone - nothing can be done about it. Then you have to understand and leave him alone. Sometimes you want to be alone but he wants to come to you - then tell him that you are helpless, but you need your space! Just create more and more understanding. That's what lovers miss: love they have enough, but understanding none, not at all. That's why on the rocks of misunderstanding their love dies. Love cannot live alone without understanding. Alone, love is very foolish; with understanding, love can live a long life, a great life - of many joys shared, of many beautiful moments shared, of great poetic experiences. But that happens only through understanding.

Dealing with Negative Feelings
Love is always beautiful in the beginning because you don't bring your destructive energies into it. In the beginning you bring your positive energies into it; both pool their energies positively, the thing goes simply fantastic. But then by and by the negative energies will start overflowing; you cannot hold them back forever. And once you have finished with your positive energy, the honeymoon is over and then comes the negative part. Then hell opens its doors and one cannot understand what has happened. Such a beautiful relationship, why is it on the rocks? If one is alert for this… Love can give you a small honeymoon, but that's all. Only understanding can give you deep intimacy.

From the very beginning, it can be saved. Pour your positive energies into it, but remember that sooner or later the negative will start coming up. And when the negative starts coming in, you have to release the negative energy alone. Go into a room by yourself and release the negative; there is no need to throw it on the other person.
If you want to scream and shout and be angry, go into a room and shut the door—shout, be angry, beat the pillow. Because nobody should be so violent as to throw things on other people. They have not done anything wrong to you, so why should you throw things on them? It is better to throw all that is negative into the dustbin. If you remain alert, you will be surprised to see that it can be done; and once the negative is released, again the positive is overflowing.
The negative can be released together only much later on in a relationship, when the relationship has become very well established. And then too it should be done only as a therapeutic measure. When the two partners of a relationship have become very alert, very positive, have become consolidated as one being and are able now to tolerate—and not only tolerate but use the other’s negativity —they have to come to an agreement that now they will be negative together also, as a therapeutic measure.
Then too my suggestion is to let it be very conscious, not unconscious; let it be very deliberate. Make it a point that every night for one hour you will be negative with each other—let it be a game—rather than being negative anywhere, anytime. Because people are not so alert—for twenty-four hours they are not alert—but for one hour you can both sit together and be negative. Then it will be a game, it will be like group therapy! After one hour you are finished with it and you don’t carry the hangover, you don’t bring it into your relationship.
The first step: the negative should be released alone. The second step: the negative should be released at a particular time with the agreement that you are both going to release the negative. Only at a third stage can one really become natural, and then there is no need to be afraid to harm the relationship or hurt the other. Then you can be both negative and positive, and everything becomes beautiful.
Love is tremendously beautiful but it can become a hell. So first you pinpoint all these things, and then don’t do them. And you will feel so happy, just in being able not to do them, you will feel a certain liberation. Those things are obsessive; they are like a neurosis, a sort of madness.
And whenever two people are in love they are there to be happy: nobody is there to be unhappy. But this is how everybody goes on being stupid. Sooner or later they start making each other unhappy, and then the whole point is lost. All dreams are shattered and again and again it becomes a wound.
The feeling of “something missing” Every lover feels that something is missing, because love is unfinished. It is a process, not a thing. Every lover is bound to feel that something is missing, but don’t interpret it wrongly. It simply shows that love in itself is a dynamic thing. It is just like a river, always moving, always moving. In the very movement is the life of the river. Once it stops it becomes a stagnant thing; then it is no longer a river. The very word “river” implies a process, the very sound of it gives you the feeling of movement.
Love is a river; it is not a thing, a commodity. So don’t think that something is missing; it is part of love’s process. And it is good that it is not completed. When something is missing you have to do something, to move. That feeling of “something missing” is a call from higher and higher peaks. Not that when you reach them you will feel fulfilled. Love never feels fulfilled. It knows no fulfillment, but it is beautiful because then it is alive forever and ever.
In and out of tune And you will always feel that something is not in tune. That too is natural, because when two persons are meeting, two different worlds are meeting. To expect that they will fit perfectly is to expect too much, is to expect the impossible, and that will create frustration. Something will always be out of tune. If you fit completely and there is nothing out of tune, the relationship will become stagnant. At the most there are a few moments when everything is in tune, rare moments. Even when they come you may not be able to catch them they are so swift, so rare. They have barely come and they are already gone, just a glimpse. And that glimpse can make you more frustrated, because then you will see more and more that things are out of tune. This is how it has to be. Make all efforts to create that intuneness, but always be ready if it doesn’t happen perfectly. And don’t be worried about it, otherwise you will fall more and more out of tune. The feeling of being in tune comes only when you are not worried about it.

, it will disappear. It comes only when you are unaware, doing something else. You cannot go directly, arrowlike. Love is not a target. It is very subtle. If you go direct, it will hide. If you do something direct, you will miss. Cooling Passions If love goes deeper, husbands and wives eventually become brothers and sisters. If love goes deeper, the sun energy becomes moon energy. The heat is gone, it is very cool. And when love goes deeper, a misunderstanding can also happen because we have become accustomed to that fever, passion, that excitement, and now it looks all foolish. It is foolish! Now if you make love, it looks silly; if you don’t, you feel as if something is missing because of the old habit. So, you will have to understand this coolness that is coming. And of course when you start feeling as one, a fear arises. A fear about what is happening because if the two of you become too much one person, you will start forgetting the other. The other can be remembered only as “the other.” Psychologists say that when a child starts learning and the word he first utters is “daddy,” it hurts the mother because she has been taking care of the child and she carried the child for nine months. She is with him all the time, but when he says “daddy,” she is no longer there. That is a real fear that we have to go through in our life—that when we merge completely with another person, we may lose ourselves. This interim period will be a little hard, but don’t think of the past. It is gone and it is gone forever; even if you try, you cannot bring it back.

an revive your loving energies with somebody else, your partner can love somebody else. Always remember one thing: to be in love is good- that is great virtue. If it is not flowing with one person, then it is better to let it be flowing with somebody else. But don’t get stuck, otherwise you will suffer, you will make your partner suffer, you both will suffer. And the problem is that if you suffer long enough, you will become addicted to your suffering. Then you will start feeling a sort of enjoyment in the suffering itself. You may become masochists, and then it will be very difficult to get out of it. Right now the problem is so great. Time to say good-bye Talk to your partner, be truthful, and ask your partner also to be truthful. You have loved each other; at least this much you owe to each other, to be truthful, to be absolutely truthful. Put all the cards out on the table and don’t try to hide; because that is not going to help. Only truth helps. Lies never help, they can only postpone the problem, and meanwhile the problem will be getting more and more roots in you. So the sooner the better. Talk to your partner: be honest, even if it hurts. Tell your partner that it will hurt, but nothing to be worried about. You have been happy together; if it hurts, that too has to be faced. Be absolutely true- no finding of scapegoats, no witch hunting, no rationalization. Just be true. Look into yourself, show your heart, and help the partner also to be true. If love is finished, then be friends, there is no need to force it. Never betray love. Lovers change. That is not a problem, that should not be a problem; we should not become attached too much to persons. Let there be only one commitment, and that has to be to love itself! Be in love with love, and everything else is secondary. And be courageous, that courage will help. Otherwise you can both pretend that really you should stay together because of this and because of that, and you will go on being miserable. Never remain in misery

That is exactly what love is: to create a space between two persons, a space which belongs neither or both - a small space where they both meet and mingle and merge. That space has nothing to do with physical space. It is simply spiritual. In that space you are not you, and the other is not the other. You both come into that space and you meet. That is what love is. If it grows, then that common space becomes bigger and bigger and bigger and then both the partners are dissolved into it.

So sometimes if you share space with somebody - a husband or friend or anybody - and sex happens as a spontaneous phenomenon - not something brooded upon, not something sought after, not something that you were planning - then it is not sexual.

There is a sort of sex which is not sexual at all. Sex can be beautiful but sexuality can never be beautiful. By "sexuality" I mean cerebral sex - thinking about it, planning it, managing, manipulating and doing many things, but the thing remains deep down in the mind that one is approaching a sex object. When you look at a person through the eyes of this kind of sexuality, you reduce the other to an object. The other is no longer a person, and the whole game is only of manipulation. You are going to land in bed sooner or later. It depends how much you play with the idea and how much both of you prolong the foreplay. But if in the mind the end is just sex, then it is the sexuality I am talking about. When the mind has nothing to do with sex, then it is pure, innocent sex. It is virgin sex.

That sex can sometimes be even purer than celibacy, because if a celibate continuously thinks of sex, then it is not celibacy. When a person moves in a deep love relationship with somebody, not thinking about sex and it happens because you share so totally that sex also comes in, then it is okay and nothing to worry about. Don't create guilt about it. In fact, it is the very source of love. Love is not what is ordinarily known as love. It is not a stew of sentimentality, emotions, feelings. It is something very deep, very foundational. It is a state of mind, and that state of mind is possible only when you penetrate your own being, when you start loving yourself. So in these days when you are alone, be a narcissist; love yourself, enjoy yourself! Delight in your body, in your mind, in your soul. And enjoy the space that is empty around you and fill it with love. The lover is not there - fill it with love! Spread your love around your space, and your space will start becoming luminous; it will glow. And then for the first time you will know, when your lover comes close to you, that now it is a totally different quality. In fact, you have something to give, share. Now you can share your space because you have your space.

Ordinarily people think that they are sharing, but how can you share if you don't have? So enjoy this space, aloneness. Don't fill it with past memories and don't fill it with future imagination and fantasy. Let it be as it is - pure, simple, silent. Delight in it; sway, sing, dance. A sheer joy of being alone. And don't feel guilty. That too is a problem because lovers always feel guilty. If they are alone and they are happy, they feel a certain guilt. They think, "How can you be happy when your lover is not with you?" - as if you are cheating on the person. But if you are not happy when you are alone, how can you be happy when you are together? So it is not a question of cheating anybody. In the night, when nobody is looking at the rosebush, it is preparing the rose. Deep down in the earth, the roots are preparing the rose. Nobody

is looking there. If the rosebush thinks, “I will show my roses only when people are around,” then it will not have anything to show. It will not have anything to share, because whatever you can share has first to be created, and all creativity arises out of the depths of aloneness.
So let this aloneness be a womb, and enjoy and delight in it; don’t feel that you are doing something wrong. It is a question of attitude and approach. Don’t give it a wrong interpretation. It need not be sorrowful. It can be tremendously peaceful and blissful. It depends on you.
The Fire Test of Truth
No relationship can truly grow if you go on holding back. If you remain clever and go on safeguarding and protecting yourself, only personalities meet, and the essential centers remain alone. Then just your mask is related, not you.
Whenever such a thing happens, there are four persons in the relationship, not two. Two false persons go on meeting, and the two real persons remain worlds apart.
Risk is there. If you become true, nobody knows whether this relationship will be capable of understanding truth, authenticity; whether this relationship will be strong enough to stand in the storm. There is a risk, and because of it, people remain very guarded. They say things which should be said; they do things which should be done. Love becomes more or less like a duty. But then the reality remains hungry, and the essence is not fed. So the essence becomes more and more sad. The lies of the personality are a very heavy burden on the essence, on the soul. The risk is real, and there is no guarantee for it, but I will tell you that the risk is worth taking.
At the most, the relationship can break, at the most. But it is better to be separate and to be real rather than being unreal and together because then it is never going to be satisfying. Benediction will never come out of it. You will remain hungry and thirsty, and you will go on dragging, just waiting for some miracle to happen.
If you are unhappy, you will attract many people, because they are also unhappy and something fits. There is a messiah, a therapist in everybody! So when you are in misery somebody comes and sympathizes and feels very good, high. Somebody is in pain, somebody is the one to help; he feels very egoistic about it. So that’s how people become interested in each other. Somebody is in pain, somebody else is the one to help.
Remember, sympathy is not love, and if somebody is sympathetic to you, beware! It is not love, and the sympathy will remain only as long as you remain in misery. Once you become happy, the sympathy will disappear, because sympathy cannot go uphill. It is just like water flowing downhill; it goes towards people who are more unhappy than you. Sympathy never rises. It has no pumping system; your sympathy cannot move towards a higher person than you.
So remember this, and resist the temptation to ask for sympathy. That temptation is there, because when one feels that love is not happening, one starts settling for less. One starts moving around in sadness and asking for sympathy in subtle ways. Never do that. That is the greatest degradation that can happen to a human being. Be happy.
It will take a little time for the love to happen, because most people are sadists, miserable themselves and trying to prove that they are messiahs, helpers, solving other people’s miseries. But if you are happy and a relationship happens, you feel good, you share, but you are not dependent on it. You don’t become a slave, you don’t become addicted to it, because you can be happy without it. A good relationship is a sharing; there is no dependence. Both partners remain totally free and independent. Nobody possesses, there is no need. It is a free gift.

have so much, so I give it to you. There is no need, I can be alone and perfectly happy. When two persons are in love and both can be alone and happy, then a tremendously beautiful love happens, because they are not hindering each other in any way in their growth. Be Aware in the Moment Whenever there is a change, any sort of change, things will come into focus más más clearly. When change disturbs you, all your inner disturbances are stirred up. When you are both feeling disturbed and both are trying to throw the responsibility on the other, just try to see it. Inside yourself, try to see it; the other is never responsible. Remember that as a mantra: The other is never responsible. Just watch it, just watch it. And if you become wise in the moment, there will be no problem. Everybody becomes wise only when the moment is gone, and retrospective wisdom is worthless. When you are picking on something in the other person, at that very moment become aware, and let your awareness function. Immediately you will drop it then and there. But when you have done everything, and fought and nagged and bitch,ed, and then later on you become wise and see that there was no point in it, it is too late. It is meaningless, you have done the harm. This wisdom is just pseudo-wisdom. It gives you a feeling as if you have understood. That is a trick of the ego. This wisdom is not going to help. When you were doing the thing, at that very moment, simultaneously, the awareness should arise and you should see that it is useless. If you can see it when it is there, then you cannot do it. One can never go against one's awareness, and if one goes against it, that awareness is not awareness. Something else is being mistaken for it. So remember, be aware in the moment. If you are falling in love with a beautiful woman or a beautiful man, you are getting into trouble. There is going to be jealousy, there is going to be murder, there is going to be something. You are in trouble. And from the very beginning, you will start trying to possess the person so that there is no possibility of anything going wrong, or beyond your control. Now, the woman was beautiful because she was free. Freedom is such an ingredient in beauty that when you see a bird on the wing in the sky, it is one kind of bird, but if you see the same bird in a cage, it is no longer the same. The bird on the wing in the sky has a beauty of its own. It is alive. It is free. The whole sky is its home. The same bird in a cage is ugly. The freedom is gone, and those wings remain from the past and they create misery. Now this is not the same bird. When you fell in love with the woman, she was free; you fell in love with freedom. When you bring her home, you destroy all possibilities of being free, but in that very destruction, you are destroying the beauty. Then one day suddenly you find that you don't love the woman at all because she is beautiful no more. This happens every time. Then you start searching for another woman and you don't see what has happened; you don't look at the mechanism, at how you destroyed the beauty of the woman. Love one is: have so much, so I give it to you. Beware of it. It is not of much value, it is not very significant. And if you are not aware, you will remain trapped in love one. Love two is: the object is not important, your subjectivity is. You are loving so you bestow your love on somebody. But love is your quality, it is not object-oriented. The subject is overflowing with the quality of love, even if you are alone you are loving. When you fall in love, the second kind of love, there will be greater joy than the first. And you will know--because this love will know--how to keep the other free. Love means to give all that is beautiful to the beloved. Freedom is the most beautiful, the most cherished goal of human consciousness; how can you take it away? If you love a woman really, or a man, the first present, the first gift, will be the gift of freedom. How can you take it away? You are not the enemy, you are the friend. This second kind of love will not be against freedom, it will not be possessive. And you will not be worried very much that somebody else also appreciates your woman or your man. In fact, you will be happy that you have chosen a woman whom others also desire. Their desire simply proves that you have chosen a diamond, a valuable being, who has intrinsic value. You will not be jealous

Loving eyes, you will be thrilled again. You will fall in love with your woman again through those eyes. This second kind of love will be more a friendship than lust and it will be more enriching to your soul. And this second kind of love will have one more difference. In the first kind of love, the object-oriented, there will be many lovers surrounding the object, and there will be fear. In the second kind of love, there will be no fear and you will be free to bestow your love not only on your beloved, you will be free to bestow your love on others too. In the first, the object will be one and many will be the lovers. In the second, the subject will be one and it will be flowing in many directions, bestowing its love in many ways on many people, because the more you love, the more love grows. If you love one person, then naturally your love is not very rich; if you love two, it is doubly rich. If you love many, or if you can love the whole of humanity, or you can love even the animal kingdom, or you can love even trees, the vegetable kingdom—then your love goes on growing. And as your love grows, you grow, you expand. This is real expansion of consciousness. Drugs only give you a false idea of expansion; love is the basic ultimate drug that gives you the real idea of expansion. And there is a possibility: Albert Schweitzer has talked about “reverence for life,” all that lives is to be loved. Mahavira in India has said the same thing. His philosophy of ahimsa, nonviolence, says to love all that lives. And there is the possibility to take even one step further than Mahavira and Schweitzer. One can have reverence for things too. That is the ultimate in love. You don’t only love that which lives, you love even that which simply exists. You love the chair, the shoes, the door through which you enter your house, the plates on which your food is served. You love things too, because they also have a kind of life. Even “I-thou” is a bit of a tension-creating phenomenon. You and the beloved are separate still, and all separation brings misery. Unless one becomes totally one with the beloved, with the loved one, some kind of misery is bound to remain lurking by the side. In the first the misery is very clear, in the second the misery is not so clear; it is far away, but it is there. In the third it is no more. So I would like you to learn more of love. Move from the first to the second and keep it in your consciousness that the third is the goal. With the second kind of love it is a question of being. You love. You love as many people as are available. And with the third kind of love, you are simply love. Then you can go on loving, there is no end to it.

To relax into silence and meditation. Most programs take place in modern, air-conditioned facilities and include a variety of individual sessions, courses, and workshops covering everything from creative arts to holistic health treatments, personal transformation and therapy, esoteric sciences, the Zen approach to sports and recreation, relationship issues, and significant life transitions for men and women. Individual sessions and group workshops are offered throughout the year, alongside a full daily schedule of meditations. Outdoor cafes and restaurants within the resort grounds serve both traditional Indian fare and a choice of international dishes, all made with organically grown vegetables from the commune's own farm. The campus has its own private supply of safe, filtered water. See www.osho.com/resort for more information, including travel tips, course schedules, and guesthouse bookings. For more information about Osho and his work, see: www.osho.com a comprehensive Web site in several languages that includes an online tour of the Meditation Resort and a calendar of its course offerings, a catalog of books and tapes, a list of Osho information centers worldwide, and selections from Osho's talks. Or contact: Osho International New York e-mail: oshointernational@oshointernational.com For copyright © 2008 by Osho International Foundation, Switzerland All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Harmony Books, an imprint of the Crown Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York. Harmony Books is a registered trademark and the Harmony Books colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc. Osho is a registered trademark of Osho International Foundation, used with permission/license. The material in this book is selected from various discourses by Osho given to a live audience. All of the Osho discourses have been published in full as books and are also available as original audio recordings. Audio recordings and the complete text archive can be found via the online OSHO Library at www.osho.com. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Osho, 1931–1990. Being in love: how to love with awareness and relate without fear / Osho.— 1st ed. p. cm. 1. Love—Religious aspects. I. Title. BP605.R34B445 2008 299'.93—dc22 2007036736 eISBN: 978-0-307-40988-1 v3.0