dy to explore the world of love, you are filled with so much rubbish about love that there is not much hope for you to be able to find the authentic and discard the false. For example, every child everywhere has been told in a thousand and one ways that love is eternal: once you love a person, you love the person always. If you love a person and later on you feel that you don’t love, it only means you never loved the person in the first place. Now this is a very dangerous idea. It is giving you an idea of a permanent love and in life nothing is permanent. The flowers blossom in the morning and by the evening they are gone. Life is a continuous flux; everything is changing, moving. Nothing is static, nothing is permanent. You have been given the idea of a permanent love which is going to destroy your whole life. You will expect permanent love from the poor woman, and the woman will expect permanent love from you. Love becomes secondary, permanence becomes primary. And love is such a delicate flower that you cannot force it to be permanent. You can have plastic flowers; that’s what people have—marriage, their family, their children, their relatives, everything is plastic. Plastic has one very spiritual thing: it is permanent. Real love is as uncertain as your life is uncertain. You cannot say that you will be here tomorrow. You cannot even say that you are going to survive the next moment. Your life is continuously changing—from childhood to youth, to middle age, to old age, to death, it goes on changing.

A real love will also change. It is possible that if you are enlightened your love has gone beyond the ordinary laws of life. It is neither changing nor permanent; it simply is. It is no more a question of how to love; you have become love itself, so whatever you do is loving. It is not that you specifically do something which is love; whatever you do, your love starts pouring through it. But before enlightenment, your love is going to be the same as everything else; it will change.

If you understand that it will change, that once in a while your partner may become interested in somebody, and you have to be understanding and loving and caring and allowing her to go the way her being feels—this is a chance for you to prove to your partner that you love her. You love her; even if she is going to love somebody else, that is irrelevant. With understanding, it is possible that your love may become a lifelong affair, but remember it will not be permanent. It will have its ups and downs, it will have changes.

It is so simple to understand. When you started loving, you were too young, with no experience; how can your love remain the same when you have become a mature person? Your love will also attain some maturity. And when you have become old, your love will have a different flavor to it. Love will go on changing, and once in a while love will just need an opportunity for change. In a healthy society, it will be possible to take that opportunity, yet your relationship with someone will not be broken.

But it is also possible that you may have to change your lovers many times in life. There is no harm in it. In fact, by changing your lovers many times in life, you will be enriched, and if the whole world follows what I am saying to you about love, the whole world will be enriched.

But a wrong idea has destroyed all possibility. The moment your partner looks at somebody, just looking, his eyes show his attraction and you freak out. You have to understand that if the man drops being interested in beautiful women on the street, beautiful actresses in the movies, that’s what you want; you want him not to be interested in anything except you. But you don’t understand human psychology. If he is not interested in women on the street, in the movies, why will he be interested in you? His interest in women is a guarantee that he is interested in you, that there is still a possibility that your love can go on and on.

But we are doing just the opposite. Men are trying to arrange it so that their women should not be interested in anybody other than them; they should be the woman’s only focus, her total concentration. The woman is asking the same, and both are driving each other mad. Concentration on one person is bound to lead you into madness.

For a lighter life, for a more playful life, you need to be flexible. You have to remember that freedom is the highest value and if love is not giving you freedom then it is not love. Freedom is a criterion: anything that gives you freedom is right, and anything that destroys your freedom is wrong. If you can remember this small criterion, your life, slowly, will start settling on the right path about everything: your relationships, your meditations, your creativity, whatever you are.

Dropping old concepts, ugly concepts. For example, in India, millions of women have died by being burned alive in the funeral pyre with their husbands. It shows that the possessiveness of the husband is so much that not only does he want to possess the woman while he is alive, he is afraid of what will happen when he is dead! He will not be able to do anything then, so it is better to take the woman with him.

And you can see that this was applied only to women—not a single man jumped into the funeral pyre of a woman in ten thousand years. What does it mean? Does it mean that only women love men and men do not love women? Does it mean that the woman has no life of her own? Only the husband’s life is her life; when the husband is dead, she has to be dead?

Such nonsense ideas have settled in our heads. You have to do continuous cleaning. Whenever you see some nonsense in your head, clean it, throw it away. If you are clear and clean in the mind, you will be able to find solutions for every problem that arises in your life.

I have recently realized that I can’t even see a man, let alone love him. I have accepted my mother’s angry conditioning towards men. When a man comes to me with his love, I run away, which encourages him to chase me. This game I play is so ugly. Please help me to drop this garbage, to be able to see men and to know their beauty, their gifts, their love.

If you really want to drop this garbage, you have to be aware that your mother is in that garbage, and that will hurt you. You have been poisoned by your mother. Out of a hundred problems and troubles, almost 90 percent of them are because of your mothers because the child grows in the mother’s womb. Even while he is in the womb, the mother’s moods and emotions affect him. If the mother remains constantly angry, sad, gloomy, frustrated; if she does not want the child and the husband has forced her to have a child; if she is having the child unwillingly, all these things are going to affect the basic fabric of the child’s mind. The child is in the making; it is not only the flesh and blood of the mother that influences the child, he will also be influenced by her psychology.

So while a mother is pregnant, she has to be very careful because a new life is being created inside her. Anything she is going to do—fighting with the husband, fighting with the neighbors, or being frustrated for any reason—is poisoning the child’s mind from the very roots. Even before he is born, he is already prejudiced.

It is not only your mother who is angry with men. The vast majority of women are angry with their husbands. The same is true about husbands; most of them are angry with their wives. But the father’s anger does not affect the child so much because the child starts inside the mother’s womb, starts growing in the shadow of the mother, not in the shadow of the father. The father remains only a casual visitor. In the morning he may give the child a kiss, pat him, and go to the office. In the evening he may come and have a little talk with the child; otherwise, the whole day long the child is learning everything from the mother.

That’s why it is crucial to understand and address your mother’s anger towards men if you hope to see them with respect and love. Change begins with oneself, and it starts by letting go of the garbage that has been passed down through generations.