Nowingly, willingly, unwillingly, but you are going—some great force is constantly working within you. Existence is evolving, it is constantly creating something within you. So the question is not how to start the journey; the question is how to recognize it. It is there, but your recognition is not there. For example, trees die, but they don’t know that. Birds and animals die, but they don’t know. Only human beings know that they have to die, and even that knowledge is very cloudy, not clear. And the same is the case with life—the birds are alive, but they don’t recognize that they are alive. How can you know life if you don’t know death? How can you know that you are alive if you don’t know that you are going to die? Both recognitions come together. Birds, animals, trees are alive, but they don’t recognize that they are alive. The human being recognizes a little, that he is going to die, but that recognition remains cloudy, hidden by thick smoke. And the same is true about life: you are alive, but you don’t know exactly what being alive means. That too is cloudy, not clear. When I say recognition, I mean becoming alert to what this life energy is, which is already on the way. To become aware of one’s own being is the beginning of the journey towards love. To come to a point where you are so absolutely alert that not even a fragment of darkness exists around you is the end of the journey. In fact, the journey never starts and never ends. You will continue even after that, but then the journey will have a totally different meaning, a totally different quality to it: it will be sheer delight. Right now it is sheer misery. “How to start the journey towards love?” Become more alert about your actions, about your relationships, about your movements. Whatever you do, even an ordinary thing like walking on the street, by and by you will become aware that you are not walking, you are being walked by. It is a very subtle feeling, that life is moving through you, not that you are moving. When you feel hungry, if you are aware you will see that it is life feeling hungry within you, not you. Becoming more alert will make you conscious of the fact that there is only one thing you have that you can call yours and that is witnessing. Everything else belongs to the universe; only witnessing belongs to you. But when you become aware of witnessing, even the idea of being “I” is dissolved. That too does not belong to you.