an revive your loving energies with somebody else, your partner can love somebody else. Always remember one thing: to be in love is good- that is great virtue. If it is not flowing with one person, then it is better to let it be flowing with somebody else. But don’t get stuck, otherwise you will suffer, you will make your partner suffer, you both will suffer. And the problem is that if you suffer long enough, you will become addicted to your suffering. Then you will start feeling a sort of enjoyment in the suffering itself. You may become masochists, and then it will be very difficult to get out of it. Right now the problem is so great. Time to say good-bye Talk to your partner, be truthful, and ask your partner also to be truthful. You have loved each other; at least this much you owe to each other, to be truthful, to be absolutely truthful. Put all the cards out on the table and don’t try to hide; because that is not going to help. Only truth helps. Lies never help, they can only postpone the problem, and meanwhile the problem will be getting more and more roots in you. So the sooner the better. Talk to your partner: be honest, even if it hurts. Tell your partner that it will hurt, but nothing to be worried about. You have been happy together; if it hurts, that too has to be faced. Be absolutely true- no finding of scapegoats, no witch hunting, no rationalization. Just be true. Look into yourself, show your heart, and help the partner also to be true. If love is finished, then be friends, there is no need to force it. Never betray love. Lovers change. That is not a problem, that should not be a problem; we should not become attached too much to persons. Let there be only one commitment, and that has to be to love itself! Be in love with love, and everything else is secondary. And be courageous, that courage will help. Otherwise you can both pretend that really you should stay together because of this and because of that, and you will go on being miserable. Never remain in misery