From the very beginning, it can be saved. Pour your positive energies into it, but remember that sooner or later the negative will start coming up. And when the negative starts coming in, you have to release the negative energy alone. Go into a room by yourself and release the negative; there is no need to throw it on the other person.
If you want to scream and shout and be angry, go into a room and shut the door—shout, be angry, beat the pillow. Because nobody should be so violent as to throw things on other people. They have not done anything wrong to you, so why should you throw things on them? It is better to throw all that is negative into the dustbin. If you remain alert, you will be surprised to see that it can be done; and once the negative is released, again the positive is overflowing.
The negative can be released together only much later on in a relationship, when the relationship has become very well established. And then too it should be done only as a therapeutic measure. When the two partners of a relationship have become very alert, very positive, have become consolidated as one being and are able now to tolerate—and not only tolerate but use the other’s negativity —they have to come to an agreement that now they will be negative together also, as a therapeutic measure.
Then too my suggestion is to let it be very conscious, not unconscious; let it be very deliberate. Make it a point that every night for one hour you will be negative with each other—let it be a game—rather than being negative anywhere, anytime. Because people are not so alert—for twenty-four hours they are not alert—but for one hour you can both sit together and be negative. Then it will be a game, it will be like group therapy! After one hour you are finished with it and you don’t carry the hangover, you don’t bring it into your relationship.
The first step: the negative should be released alone. The second step: the negative should be released at a particular time with the agreement that you are both going to release the negative. Only at a third stage can one really become natural, and then there is no need to be afraid to harm the relationship or hurt the other. Then you can be both negative and positive, and everything becomes beautiful.
Love is tremendously beautiful but it can become a hell. So first you pinpoint all these things, and then don’t do them. And you will feel so happy, just in being able not to do them, you will feel a certain liberation. Those things are obsessive; they are like a neurosis, a sort of madness.
And whenever two people are in love they are there to be happy: nobody is there to be unhappy. But this is how everybody goes on being stupid. Sooner or later they start making each other unhappy, and then the whole point is lost. All dreams are shattered and again and again it becomes a wound.
The feeling of “something missing” Every lover feels that something is missing, because love is unfinished. It is a process, not a thing. Every lover is bound to feel that something is missing, but don’t interpret it wrongly. It simply shows that love in itself is a dynamic thing. It is just like a river, always moving, always moving. In the very movement is the life of the river. Once it stops it becomes a stagnant thing; then it is no longer a river. The very word “river” implies a process, the very sound of it gives you the feeling of movement.
Love is a river; it is not a thing, a commodity. So don’t think that something is missing; it is part of love’s process. And it is good that it is not completed. When something is missing you have to do something, to move. That feeling of “something missing” is a call from higher and higher peaks. Not that when you reach them you will feel fulfilled. Love never feels fulfilled. It knows no fulfillment, but it is beautiful because then it is alive forever and ever.
In and out of tune And you will always feel that something is not in tune. That too is natural, because when two persons are meeting, two different worlds are meeting. To expect that they will fit perfectly is to expect too much, is to expect the impossible, and that will create frustration. Something will always be out of tune. If you fit completely and there is nothing out of tune, the relationship will become stagnant. At the most there are a few moments when everything is in tune, rare moments. Even when they come you may not be able to catch them they are so swift, so rare. They have barely come and they are already gone, just a glimpse. And that glimpse can make you more frustrated, because then you will see more and more that things are out of tune. This is how it has to be. Make all efforts to create that intuneness, but always be ready if it doesn’t happen perfectly. And don’t be worried about it, otherwise you will fall more and more out of tune. The feeling of being in tune comes only when you are not worried about it.