"In those days horses were very valuable and these were the most beautiful horses. Birbal said, 'It is useless, but if you say so I will go.' He went and everybody was found to be henpecked. It was so easy to see! Birbal would just call the person and his wife to their front door and ask the husband, 'Are you henpecked or not?' The man would look at his wife and say, 'You should have asked when I was alone. This is not right, it will create unnecessary trouble. Just for a horse I am not going to destroy my life. You take your horses, I don't want either one of them.' But then he came upon one man who was sitting in front of his house with two persons massaging him. He was a champion wrestler, a very strong man. Birbal thought, 'Perhaps this man - he could kill anybody, even without any weapons. If he just got hold of your neck you would be finished!' Birbal said, 'Can I ask you a question?' The man stood up and said, 'Question? What question?' Birbal asked him, 'Are you henpecked?' That man said, 'First, let us greet each other, a handshake.' He crushed Birbal's hand and said, 'I will not let go of your hand until tears start coming from your eyes! You dare to ask me such a question?' Birbal was nearly dying - he himself was almost a man of steel, but tears started coming, and he said, 'Just let go of me! You are not henpecked! Clearly I have just come to the wrong place to ask such a thing. But where is your wife?' The man pointed and said, 'Look, she is there, cooking my breakfast.' A very small woman was cooking his breakfast. The woman was so small and the man was so big that Birbal thought there really was a possibility that perhaps this man was not henpecked. He could kill this woman! So he said, 'Now there is no need to ask anyone else. But I would like to know who your wife is.' The man said, 'My wife? She is the one you asked me about earlier - the small one cooking my breakfast!' Then Birbal understood the whole situation and said, 'Well done! If you ever come across such a difficult problem again, just tell me. I will help you.'

In those days horses were very valuable and these were the most beautiful horses. Birbal said, 'It is useless, but if you say so I will go.' He went and everybody was found to be henpecked. It was so easy to see! Birbal would just call the person and his wife to their front door and ask the husband, 'Are you henpecked or not?' The man would look at his wife and say, 'You should have asked when I was alone. This is not right, it will create unnecessary trouble. Just for a horse I am not going to destroy my life. You take your horses, I don't want either one of them.' But then he came upon one man who was sitting in front of his house with two persons massaging him. He was a champion wrestler, a very strong man. Birbal thought, 'Perhaps this man - he could kill anybody, even without any weapons. If he just got hold of your neck you would be finished!' Birbal said, 'Can I ask you a question?' The man stood up and said, 'Question? What question?' Birbal asked him, 'Are you henpecked or not?' That man said, 'First, let us greet each other, a handshake.' He crushed Birbal's hand and said, 'I will not let go of your hand until tears start coming from your eyes! You dare to ask me such a question?' Birbal was nearly dying - he himself was almost a man of steel, but tears started coming, and he said, 'Just let go of me! You are not henpecked! Clearly I have just come to the wrong place to ask such a thing. But where is your wife?' The man pointed and said, 'Look, she is there, cooking my breakfast.' A very small woman was cooking his breakfast. The woman was so small and the man was so big that Birbal thought there really was a possibility that perhaps this man was not henpecked. He could kill this woman! So he said, 'Now there is no need to ask anyone else. But I would like to know who your wife is.' The man said, 'My wife? She is the one you asked me about earlier - the small one cooking my breakfast!' Then Birbal understood the whole situation and said, 'Well done! If you ever come across such a difficult problem again, just tell me. I will help you.'"