Energy is not easy for everyone to create. But her orgasm has a totally different way of happening. Man's sexuality is local, like local anesthesia. A woman's body is sexual all over, and unless her whole body starts trembling with joy, each cell of her body starts becoming involved; she cannot have an orgasmic explosion. So it is not only in your case that the man is boring, it is the case for almost ninety-nine percent of women around the world. The whole situation has to be changed. The woman should not be under the man. In the first place, it is ugly—the man has a stronger body, the woman is more fragile. She should be on top of the man, not the man on top of her. Secondly, the man should remain silent, inactive, so that his orgasm is not finished within two minutes. If you are silent and let the woman go crazy on top of your chest, it will give her good exercise and bring her to an explosion of orgasmic energy. It takes time for her whole body to warm up, and if you are too active there is no time. You meet, but the meeting is not of beauty, of love, but just utilitarian. Try with your girlfriend what I am saying. You be the inactive partner and let her be the active partner. Allow her to be uninhibited. She has not to behave like a lady, she has to behave like an authentic woman. The "lady" is just created by men; the woman is created by existence. And you have to fill the gap between her orgasms. The gap can be filled in only one way, that you remain very inactive, silent, and enjoy her going crazy. She will have multiple orgasms. You should end the game with your orgasm, but you should not begin with it. Then your girlfriend will not call you a little boring. You will be a really interesting, wonderful guy who is behaving like a lady! And keep your eyes closed so that she can do anything—moving her hands, her body, moaning, groaning, shouting. You are not allowed to make much fuss about these things with her because girlfriends are not your permanent wives; no law prevents them from moving with someone who is more juicy.