CONTENTS
Title	Page
Introduction:	What	Is	Love?
PART	I.	The	Journey	from	“Me”	to	“We”
Understanding	the	Nature	and	Nurture	of	Love
Beyond	Dependency	and	Domination—Breaking	Out	of	the	Shell	of	the	Ego
The	Natural	Stages	of	Life	and	Loving
The	Candle	of	Awareness
PART	II.	Love	Is	a	Breeze
Making	the	Most	of	Romance
Nonsense	Ideas	in	Your	Head
“Love	Hurts”	and	Other	Misunderstandings
Attraction	and	Opposition
Dropping	Out	of	the	Lonely	Hearts	Club
Soul	Mates	or	Cell	Mates?
Love	and	the	Art	of	Non-doing
PART	III.	From	Relationship	to	Relating—Love	as	a	State	of
Being
“Love”	Is	a	Verb
Couples	Counseling—Insights	for	Living	and	Growing	in	Love
Only	Love	Remains
About	the	Author
OSHO	
International	Meditation	Resort
For	More	Information
Also	by	Osho
Copyright	
INTRODUCTION:	WHAT	IS	LOVE?
It	is	unfortunate	that	we	have	to	ask	this	question.	In	the	natural	course	of	things
everybody	would	know	what	love	is.	But	as	it	is,	we	are	in	a	state	of	ignorance,	
which	is	unfortunate.
Love	has	been	misinterpreted,	misunderstood,	and	even	maligned.	It	is	one	of	the	most	precious	
gifts	that	humanity	possesses,	and	yet	it	seems	to	have	become	a	victim	of	our	own	misconceptions	
and	misunderstandings.
Love	is	not	just	an	emotion	or	a	feeling,	but	also	a	state	of	being.	It	is	the	glue	that	binds	us	to	each	other	and	to	ourself.
In	this	book,	we	will	explore	the	nature	and	nurture	of	love,	as	well	as	its	role	in	our	lives.	We	will	also	look	at	the	ways	in	which	we	can	foster	and	deepen	our	understanding	
and	experience	of	love.
PART	I.	The	Journey	from	“Me”	to	“We”
In	this	part,	we	will	explore	the	ways	in	which	we	can	overcome	our	ego	and	find	a	sense	of	connection	and	oneness	with	others.
PART	II.	Love	Is	a	Breeze
In	this	part,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	we	can	deepen	our	understanding	and	experience	of	love.	We	will	also	explore	the	role	of	romance	in	our	lives.
PART	III.	From	Relationship	to	Relating—Love	as	a	State	of
Being
In	this	part,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	we	can	create	healthy	and	fulfilling	relationships.	We	will	also	explore	the	ways	in	which	we	can	foster	a	state	of	love	in	our	lives.
“Love”	Is	a	Verb
In	this	chapter,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	we	can	use	love	as	a	powerful	tool	to	transform	ourselves	and	our	relationships.	We	will	also	explore	the	role	of	compassion	and	empathy	in	our	lives.
Couples	Counseling—Insights	for	Living	and	Growing	in	Love
In	this	chapter,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	couples	can	enhance	their	relationships	by	deepening	their	connection	and	understanding	of	each	other.	We	will	also	explore	the	role	of	communication	and	trust	in	our	lives.
Only	Love	Remains
In	this	chapter,	we	will	look	at	the	ways	in	which	love	can	overcome	any	obstacle	or	challenge	that	we	face.	We	will	also	explore	the	role	of	forgiveness	and	grace	in	our	lives.
About	the	Author
Osho	was	an	Indian	spiritual	leader	and	philosopher,	who	is	known	for	his	contributions	to	the	fields	of	meditation	and	humanistic	psychology.	He	founded	the	Osho	International	Meditation	Resort,	which	has	centers	in	over	100	countries.
For	More	Information
To	learn	more	about	Osho	and	his	work,	visit	www.osho.com.