guaranteed by the law, by the court, by the policeman. The guarantee will be inner. It will be a commitment from the heart, it will be a silent communion. If you enjoy being with somebody, you would like to enjoy it more and more. If you enjoy the intimacy, you would like to explore the intimacy more and more. And there are a few flowers of love that bloom only after long intimacies. There are seasonal flowers too; within six weeks they are there in the sun, but within six weeks again they are gone forever. There are flowers which take years to bloom, and there are flowers that keep blooming for many years to come. The longer it takes, the deeper it goes. But it has to be a commitment from one heart to another heart. It has not even to be verbalized, because to verbalize it is to profane it. It has to be a silent commitment: eye to eye, heart to heart, being to being. It has to be understood, not said. It is so ugly seeing people going to the church or the court to get married. It is so ugly, so inhuman. It simply shows they can't trust themselves, they trust the authorities more than they trust their own inner voice. It shows that because they can't trust their love, they trust the law. Forget relationships and learn how to relate. Once you are in a relationship, you start taking each other for granted. That's what destroys all love affairs. The woman thinks she knows the man, the man thinks he knows the woman. Nobody knows! It is impossible to know the other, the other remains a mystery. And to take the other for granted is insulting, disrespectful. To think that you know your partner is very ungrateful. How can you know the woman? How can you know the man? They are processes, they are not things. The woman that you knew yesterday is not there today. So much water has gone down the Ganges; she is somebody else, totally different. Relate again, start again, don't take it for granted. And the man who you slept with last night, look at his face again in the morning. He is no longer the same person, so much has changed. So much, incalculably much, has changed! That is the difference between a thing and a person. In fact the more you know, the more mysterious the other becomes. Then love is a constant adventure.

COUPLES COUNSELING
Insights for Living and Growing in Love
Editor's note: The following selections are taken from the evening meetings where Osho spoke directly with one or both partners in a couple, or with individuals who had come to ask him for insight into their problems in relationships.

When Telepathy Doesn't Work
It almost always happens that couples don't make things clear to each other. You hope that the other will understand, and the same is the case with the other: he or she thinks you will understand. Nobody understands! There is no communication, the problems have never been put forward clearly. You have to put things clearly: "I am not interfering with you, you can be who you are - I love you and I will go on loving you - but what about me?" Then some way can be found to work out the difficulties. You can remain together and still you can have your individuality and your freedom. If both partners really love each other, then they will be able to deal with the problem. But what really happens is that we never make things clear to each other. We go on hoping that the other will know telepathically. Nobody knows telepathically! The other is not a clairvoyant, you have to put it exactly: "two plus two is four" - like that. But what happens is that the real problem is not talked about.

Understanding the Need for Space
Create understanding, talk to each other, and understand that sometimes the other needs his space. And this is a problem: it may not happen at the same time for both of you. Sometimes you want to be with your partner, and he wants to be alone - nothing can be done about it. Then you have to understand and leave him alone. Sometimes you want to be alone but he wants to come to you - then tell him that you are helpless, but you need your space! Just create more and more understanding. That's what lovers miss: love they have enough, but understanding none, not at all. That's why on the rocks of misunderstanding their love dies. Love cannot live alone without understanding. Alone, love is very foolish; with understanding, love can live a long life, a great life - of many joys shared, of many beautiful moments shared, of great poetic experiences. But that happens only through understanding.

Dealing with Negative Feelings
Love is always beautiful in the beginning because you don't bring your destructive energies into it. In the beginning you bring your positive energies into it; both pool their energies positively, the thing goes simply fantastic. But then by and by the negative energies will start overflowing; you cannot hold them back forever. And once you have finished with your positive energy, the honeymoon is over and then comes the negative part. Then hell opens its doors and one cannot understand what has happened. Such a beautiful relationship, why is it on the rocks? If one is alert for this… Love can give you a small honeymoon, but that's all. Only understanding can give you deep intimacy.