Loving eyes, you will be thrilled again. You will fall in love with your woman again through those eyes. This second kind of love will be more a friendship than lust and it will be more enriching to your soul. And this second kind of love will have one more difference. In the first kind of love, the object-oriented, there will be many lovers surrounding the object, and there will be fear. In the second kind of love, there will be no fear and you will be free to bestow your love not only on your beloved, you will be free to bestow your love on others too. In the first, the object will be one and many will be the lovers. In the second, the subject will be one and it will be flowing in many directions, bestowing its love in many ways on many people, because the more you love, the more love grows. If you love one person, then naturally your love is not very rich; if you love two, it is doubly rich. If you love many, or if you can love the whole of humanity, or you can love even the animal kingdom, or you can love even trees, the vegetable kingdom—then your love goes on growing. And as your love grows, you grow, you expand. This is real expansion of consciousness. Drugs only give you a false idea of expansion; love is the basic ultimate drug that gives you the real idea of expansion. And there is a possibility: Albert Schweitzer has talked about “reverence for life,” all that lives is to be loved. Mahavira in India has said the same thing. His philosophy of ahimsa, nonviolence, says to love all that lives. And there is the possibility to take even one step further than Mahavira and Schweitzer. One can have reverence for things too. That is the ultimate in love. You don’t only love that which lives, you love even that which simply exists. You love the chair, the shoes, the door through which you enter your house, the plates on which your food is served. You love things too, because they also have a kind of life. Even “I-thou” is a bit of a tension-creating phenomenon. You and the beloved are separate still, and all separation brings misery. Unless one becomes totally one with the beloved, with the loved one, some kind of misery is bound to remain lurking by the side. In the first the misery is very clear, in the second the misery is not so clear; it is far away, but it is there. In the third it is no more. So I would like you to learn more of love. Move from the first to the second and keep it in your consciousness that the third is the goal. With the second kind of love it is a question of being. You love. You love as many people as are available. And with the third kind of love, you are simply love. Then you can go on loving, there is no end to it.