habit—.”
But then they started looking, and they found that things were not stolen.
Somebody’s money was missing but it was found in somebody else's bag.
Somebody else's coat was missing but it was found in somebody else's luggage.
Everything was found, but it was an unnecessary trouble—every morning! And nobody could conceive what can be the meaning of it? Certainly it is not the thief, because nothing was actually stolen.
The third night, Eknath remained awake to see what was going on. In the middle of the night, the thief—just out of habit—woke up, started taking things from one place to another place. Eknath stopped him and said, “What are you doing? Have you forgotten your promise?”
He said, “No, I have not forgotten my promise. I am not stealing anything, but I have not promised that I will not move things from one place to another place. After six months I have to be a thief again; this is just practice. And you must understand, it is a lifelong habit, you cannot drop it just like that. Just give me time. You should understand my problem also. For three days I have not stolen a single thing—it is just like fasting! This is just a substitute, I am keeping myself busy. This is my business time, in the middle of the night, so it is very hard for me just to lie down on the bed awake. And so many idiots are sleeping and I am not doing any harm to anybody. In the morning they will find their things.”
Eknath said, “You are a strange man. You see that every morning there is such chaos, and one or two hours unnecessarily are wasted in finding where you have put things, whose property has gone into whose luggage. Everybody has to open everything and ask everybody… ‘To whom does this belong?’”
The thief said, “This much concession you have to give to me.”
Twenty-six years of a false personality imposed by people who you loved, whom you respected, and they were not intentionally doing anything bad to you. Their intentions were good, just their awareness was nil. They were against searching. You were born. You have come into the world with life, with consciousness, with tremendous sensitivity. Just look at a small child. Look at his eyes, the freshness. All that has been covered by a false personality. There is no need to be afraid. You can lose only that which needs to be lost. And it is good to lose it soon, because the longer it stays, the stronger it becomes, and one does not know anything about tomorrow. Don't die before realizing your authentic being. Only those few people are fortunate who have lived with authentic being and who have died with authentic being because they know that life is eternal, and death is a fiction.