This story has been told so many times and you are telling it again! I have heard a story about Albert Einstein's wife. Friends of Albert Einstein would come to visit, and of course Einstein would always tell some anecdotes, some jokes, and they would laugh. But one friend became curious; he noticed that whenever he came and Einstein started telling stories, Frau Einstein would immediately start knitting or doing something. So he asked her, "The moment your husband starts telling some story or some joke, why do you start knitting?" She said, "If I don't do anything, it will be tremendously difficult for me to tolerate because I have heard those stories and jokes a thousand and one times. You come to visit sometimes, I am always here. Whenever anybody comes he tells the same jokes, the same stories. If I didn't do something with my hands, I would become so fidgety that it would be impolite. So I have to move my restlessness into some work. Then I can hide my fidgetiness behind the work."

Whenever you feel bored, you will feel restless. Restlessness is an indication of the body; the body is saying, "Move away from here. Go anywhere, but don't be here." But the mind goes on smiling, and the eyes go on sparkling, and you go on saying that you are listening and you have never heard such an interesting story. The mind is civilized; the body is still wild. The mind is human; the body is still animal. The mind knows the rules and regulations, how to behave and how not to behave. So even if you meet a bore, you say, "I am so happy, so glad to see you!" And deep down, if you were allowed, you would kill this person.

A marriage is almost finished by the time the honeymoon is over, then you go on pretending. But behind those pretensions, a deep boredom accumulates. Almost always people die without ever having been alive. Bertrand Russell is reported to have said, "When I think back, I cannot find more than a few moments in my life when I was really alive, aflame." Can you remember how many moments in your life you were really aflame? Rarely does it happen. One dreams about those moments, one imagines those moments, one hopes for those moments, but they almost never happen. Even if they do happen, sooner or later they also become repetitive.

What to do then? Become more conscious. It is not a question of changing situations. Transform your being, become more conscious.