To understand the roots of human egoism and conflict, we must consider our early dependence on others. A child is born absolutely helpless, particularly a human child. He cannot survive without others' help. Most animals, birds, and trees do not need such extensive care; even if they sometimes require help, it is very little – maybe only a few days or months. But a human child is so helpless that he must depend on others for years. It is here that the root has to be sought. 

Why does helplessness create the human ego? The child is helpless and depends on others, but the ignorant mind of the child interprets this dependence as if he is the center of the whole world. The child thinks, "Whenever I cry, my mother runs immediately; whenever I am hungry, I just have to give an indication and the breast is given; whenever I am wet, just a slight cry and somebody comes and changes my clothes." The child lives like an emperor. In fact, he is absolutely helpless and dependent, and the mother and father, the family and his caretakers are all helping him survive. They are not dependent on the child – the child is dependent on them. But the mind of the child interprets this as if he is the center of the whole world, as if the whole world exists just for him.

And the world of the child is very small in the beginning. It consists of the mother, the caretaker, the father on the fringe – this is the child's whole world. These people love the child. And the child becomes more and more egoistic. He feels himself to be the very center of all existence, and in that way the ego is created. Through dependence and helplessness, the ego is created.

In fact, the child's real situation is just the contrary from what he thinks; there is no real justification to create such an ego. But the child is absolutely ignorant, he is not capable of understanding the complexity of the thing. He cannot know that he is helpless – he thinks he is the dictator! And then for his whole life he will try to remain the dictator. He will become a Napoleon, an Alexander, an Adolf Hitler – your presidents, prime ministers, dictators are all childish. They are trying to achieve the same thing they experienced as children; they want to be the center of the whole existence. With them the world should live and die; the whole world is their periphery and they are the center of it; they have been brought up in the same way.

There exists a certain school of psychoanalysts in the West who have proposed that unless children are brought up without their fathers and mothers, the world will never be at peace. I do not support them because then children will never be brought up in any way! These psychologists have something of truth in their proposal, but it is a very dangerous idea. Because if children are brought up in nurseries without fathers and mothers, without any love, with total indifference, they may not have the problems of the ego but they will have other, even more damaging and dangerous problems.

If a child is brought up in a situation where love is lacking, they will not have egos – that's true. Their life will not have so much struggle and fight. But they will not be able to stand up for themselves at all. They will always be in flight, escaping from everybody, hiding in caves in their own being. They will not become Buddhas, they will not become radiant with vitality; they will not be centered, at ease, at home. So I do not support these psychologists. Their approach would create robots, not human beings – and robots of course have no problems. Or, they may create human beings who are more like animals. There will be less anxiety, less ulcers, less cancer but that is not worth achieving when it means that you cannot grow to a higher peak of consciousness. Instead you would be falling downwards; it will be a regression. Of course, if you become an animal there will be no anguish at all because there is nobody inside to feel anguished, to feel anxious. But this is not worth achieving. One has to be like a god, not like a rock. And by that I mean it to have absolute consciousness and still have no worries, no anxieties, no problems; to enjoy life like the birds, to celebrate life like the birds – not through regression but by growing to the optimum of consciousness.