And without opening his eyes to give any indication that he was awake, he said, "Cut! Now to the next scene," as if he was directing a film! If you really love the woman, in the morning you will tell her your dream, that you made love to another woman in the night in your dream. Everything has to be shared. The whole heart has to be shared. Intimacy means that there is no privacy. You don't carry anything private now, at least with the person you are intimate with, you drop your privacy. You are nude and naked-good, bad, whatsoever you are, you open your heart. And whatever the cost you pay for it; whatever the trouble you go through with it. That brings growth. And you help the other person also to drop all inhibitions, screens, masks. In an intimate relationship one comes to see the original face of the other and one comes to show one's own original face. If a relationship helps you to find your original face then it is meditative, then it is spiritual. If your relationship simply helps you to create more and more mask and hypocrisies then it is irreligious. Try to understand my definition. If my definition is understood then out of a hundred marriages ninety-nine are irreligious because they are simply creating more and more falsity. From the very beginning the falsity starts. I have heard: The minister, casting an appraising eye over the bridal couple before him and the goodly crowd come to witness the ceremony, intoned, "If there is anyone here who knows why these two should not be joined together in wedlock, let them speak now or forever hold their peace." But no one spoke. So he joined the couple together and they were married. And while they were enjoying their honeymoon a strange man entered their room with a knife in his hand and said, "I have killed your husband, I am the real husband of this woman." The bridegroom was terrified and ran away but the stranger said, "You are free to go now, I will not bother you anymore." And so the couple left and went on their way. And after they had traveled for some time the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is a magician." The couple were astonished at what they had heard and they said, "We don't believe you, we are not going to listen to you anymore." And so they left and went on their way again. But as they were walking along the road the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is a magician." The couple were astonished at what they had heard and they said, "We don't believe you, we are not going to listen to you anymore." And so they left and went on their way again. But as they were walking along the road the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is a magician." The couple were astonished at what they had heard and they said, "We don't believe you, we are not going to listen to you anymore." And so they left and went on their way again. But as they were walking along the road the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is a magician." The couple were astonished at what they had heard and they said, "We don't believe you, we are not going to listen to you anymore." And so they left and went on their way again. But as they were walking along the road the wife said to her husband, "I have been thinking about what that strange man said, and I think we should try to find him again and see if he is telling the truth or not." So they went back to the place where they were married and found the stranger sitting under a tree. And when they came to him he said, "Yes, I am the real husband of this woman, but I have nothing to do with your marriage. It was all arranged by my friend, who is