To explore the world of love, you are filled with so much rubbish about love that there is not much hope for you to be able to find the authentic and discard the false. For example, every child everywhere has been told in a thousand and one ways that love is eternal: once you love a person you love the person always. If you love a person and later on you feel that you don't love, it only means you never loved the person in the first place. Now this is a very dangerous idea. It is giving you an idea of permanent love and in life nothing is permanent. The flowers blossom in the morning and by the evening they are gone. Life is a continuous flux; everything is changing, moving. Nothing is static, nothing is permanent. You have been given the idea of permanent love which is going to destroy your whole life. You will expect permanent love from the poor woman, and the woman will expect permanent love from you. Love becomes secondary, permanence becomes primary. And love is such a delicate flower that you cannot force it to be permanent. You can have plastic flowers; that's what people have - marriage, their family, their children, their relatives, everything is plastic. Plastic has one very spiritual thing: it is impermanent. Real love is as uncertain as your life is uncertain. You cannot say that you will be here tomorrow. You cannot even say that you are going to survive the next moment. Your life is continuously changing - from childhood to youth, to middle age, to old age, it goes on changing. A real love will also change. It is possible that if you are enlightened your love has gone beyond the ordinary laws of life. It is neither changing nor permanent; it simply is. It is no more a question of how to love; you have become love itself, so whatever you do is loving. But before enlightenment your love is going to be the same as everything else; it will change. If you understand that it will change, that once in a while your partner may become interested in somebody, and you have to be understanding and loving and caring and allowing her to go - your life, slowly, will start settling on the right path about everything: your relationships, your meditations, your creativity, whatever you are. Dropping old concepts, ugly concepts. For example, in India, millions of women have died by being burned alive in the funeral pyre with their husbands. It shows that the possessiveness of the husband is so much that not only does he want to possess the woman while he is alive, he is afraid of what will happen when he is dead! He will not be able to do anything then, so it is better to take the woman with him. And you can see that this was applied only to women - not a single man jumped into the funeral pyre of a woman in ten thousand years. What does it mean? Does it mean that only women love men and men do not love women? Does it mean that the woman has no life of her own? Only the husband's life is her life; when the husband is dead, she has to be dead? Such nonsense ideas have settled in our heads. You have to do continuous cleaning. Whenever you see some nonsense in your head, clean it, throw it away. If you are clear and clean in the mind, you will be able to find solutions for every problem that arises in your life.