start
having a love affair. When you are sharing your joy, you don't create a prison for anybody. You simply give. You don't even expect gratitude or thankfulness because you are not giving to get anything, not even gratitude. You are giving because you are so full you have to give.
So I will not tell you to do anything about your loneliness. Look for your aloneness. Forget loneliness, forget darkness, forget pain. These are just the absence of aloneness, and the experience of aloneness will dispel them instantly.
And the method is the same: just watch your mind, be aware. Become more and more conscious, so finally you are only conscious of yourself. That is the point where you become aware of aloneness.
And always look to see if anything that you are facing as a problem is a negative thing or a positive thing. If it is a negative thing then don't fight with it; don't bother about it at all. Just look for the positive of it, and you will be at the right door. Most of the people in the world miss because they start fighting directly with the negative door. There is no door; there is only darkness, there is only absence.
So before you face a problem, just look at it—is it an absence of something? And the truth is that all your problems are the absence of something. Once you have found what they are the absence of, then go after the positive. The moment you find the positive you have found the light, and the darkness is finished.
Why is it I feel fully alive only when I am in love? I tell myself that I should be able to spark myself without the other, but so far no luck. Is this some stupid game I am playing? The first meeting happened, but the president never turned up. They were all worried. They rushed to his home and they asked him, "What is the matter? Have you forgotten?"
He said, "No, but my wife won't allow me. She says, 'You go out, and I will never allow you back in!' Of course risk I cannot take."
The man has reduced the woman to a slave and the woman has reduced the man to a slave. And of course both hate the slavery, both resist it. They are constantly fighting; any small excuse and the fight starts. But the real fight is somewhere else deep down; the real fight is that they are asking for freedom.
You say: "I tell myself that I should be able to spark myself without the other, but so far no luck." It will remain so, it will not change. You should rather change your conditioning about love and freedom. Love the person, but give the person total freedom. Love the person, but from the very beginning make it clear that you are not selling your freedom.
And if you cannot make it happen in this community, here with me, you cannot make it happen anywhere else. Here we are experimenting with many things, and one of the dimensions of our experiment is to make love and freedom possible together, to support their coexistence together. Love a person but don't possess, and don't be possessed