Yes, I can see that," said the woman, "but the ad also said I wanted a 'fantastic lover.'" The man smiles and says, "I rang the doorbell, didn't I?" Although I am deeply satisfied and nourished by my regular food, still from time to time I feel a strong pull towards other dishes, and enjoy Italian pizzas, French wine, or Japanese sushi. It's not that I don't want to eat out occasionally, but I'd like to feel it is in my hands whether I do or not, and not be a victim of this hormonal conspiracy. Can you please give me a clue how to go beyond these biological pulls? If one allows nature without any inhibitions to take its own course, one transcends biology, body, mind, without any effort. But we are full of inhibitions. Even the so-called young people, who think that they have disowned and repressed their inhibitions, are in a very subtle way repressive. If you are repressive then you cannot transcend biological pulls naturally, without any effort. So, the first thing to be remembered is that nature is right. All the old traditions have been telling you that nature is not right. You have to divide nature into right and wrong. But nature is indivisible. So while you are dividing it, you are simply making an impossible effort. The whole of nature has to be accepted with great joy and gratitude. Biology is not your bondage but a certain stage of growth. Life taken with insight and understanding helps you to go beyond itself without asking you for any discipline, any effort, any arduous conflict. We are children of nature. But all the religions have created one thing certainly: a divided mind, a schizophrenic man who is pulled in two directions. They have all given you moralities. The natural man needs no morality. Accept it, but don't keep it a secret from your lover. Don't let her down. Don't make her feel that she is not enough for you. Say to her, "You are too satisfying and my mind wants a little change of atmosphere, some excitement so that I can feel that I am still alive." And remember, whatever you take for yourself, you have to give her too. It has not to be one-sided, not that only you go to the pizza place or find a Chinese restaurant; you allow her also. The woman has become aware of orgasm only in the last century and the whole credit goes to the movement of psychoanalysis. In the more traditional Eastern countries, 98 percent of women are still unaware that there is anything in making love, because she gets no juice, no experience. She in fact hates the whole affair. Ejaculation is not her need, it is man's need; but both have remained deprived of sex and its ultimate orgasmic experiences. But the trouble is, how to manage it? Anything looks very immoral. Either you have to invite all your friends, so that five or six friends make love, one by one, to the woman.