That is exactly what love is: to create a space between two persons, a space which belongs neither or both - a small space where they both meet and mingle and merge. That space has nothing to do with physical space. It is simply spiritual. In that space you are not you, and the other is not the other. You both come into that space and you meet. That is what love is. If it grows, then that common space becomes bigger and bigger and bigger and then both the partners are dissolved into it.

So sometimes if you share space with somebody - a husband or friend or anybody - and sex happens as a spontaneous phenomenon - not something brooded upon, not something sought after, not something that you were planning - then it is not sexual.

There is a sort of sex which is not sexual at all. Sex can be beautiful but sexuality can never be beautiful. By "sexuality" I mean cerebral sex - thinking about it, planning it, managing, manipulating and doing many things, but the thing remains deep down in the mind that one is approaching a sex object. When you look at a person through the eyes of this kind of sexuality, you reduce the other to an object. The other is no longer a person, and the whole game is only of manipulation. You are going to land in bed sooner or later. It depends how much you play with the idea and how much both of you prolong the foreplay. But if in the mind the end is just sex, then it is the sexuality I am talking about. When the mind has nothing to do with sex, then it is pure, innocent sex. It is virgin sex.

That sex can sometimes be even purer than celibacy, because if a celibate continuously thinks of sex, then it is not celibacy. When a person moves in a deep love relationship with somebody, not thinking about sex and it happens because you share so totally that sex also comes in, then it is okay and nothing to worry about. Don't create guilt about it. In fact, it is the very source of love. Love is not what is ordinarily known as love. It is not a stew of sentimentality, emotions, feelings. It is something very deep, very foundational. It is a state of mind, and that state of mind is possible only when you penetrate your own being, when you start loving yourself. So in these days when you are alone, be a narcissist; love yourself, enjoy yourself! Delight in your body, in your mind, in your soul. And enjoy the space that is empty around you and fill it with love. The lover is not there - fill it with love! Spread your love around your space, and your space will start becoming luminous; it will glow. And then for the first time you will know, when your lover comes close to you, that now it is a totally different quality. In fact, you have something to give, share. Now you can share your space because you have your space.

Ordinarily people think that they are sharing, but how can you share if you don't have? So enjoy this space, aloneness. Don't fill it with past memories and don't fill it with future imagination and fantasy. Let it be as it is - pure, simple, silent. Delight in it; sway, sing, dance. A sheer joy of being alone. And don't feel guilty. That too is a problem because lovers always feel guilty. If they are alone and they are happy, they feel a certain guilt. They think, "How can you be happy when your lover is not with you?" - as if you are cheating on the person. But if you are not happy when you are alone, how can you be happy when you are together? So it is not a question of cheating anybody. In the night, when nobody is looking at the rosebush, it is preparing the rose. Deep down in the earth, the roots are preparing the rose. Nobody