Be against their hidden desire to dominate. Husbands say they love their wives, but it is just domination. They are so jealous, so possessive, how can they be loving? Wives go on saying they love their husbands, but twenty-four hours a day they are creating hell; in every possible way they are reducing the husband to something ugly. The henpecked husband is an ugly phenomenon. And the problem is that first the wife reduces the husband to a henpecked husband and then she loses interest in him, because who can remain interested in a henpecked husband? He seems to be worthless; he does not seem to be man enough.
First the husband tries to make the wife just his possession, and once she is a possession he loses interest. There is some hidden logic in it: his whole interest was to possess; now that is finished, and he would like to try some other woman so he can again go on another trip of possession. Beware of these ego numbers. Then you will be hurt, because the person you are trying to possess is bound to revolt in some way or other, is bound to sabotage your tricks, your strategies, because nobody loves anything more than freedom. Even love is secondary to freedom; freedom is the highest value. Love can be sacrificed for freedom, but freedom cannot be sacrificed for love. And that's what we have been doing for centuries, sacrificing freedom for love. Then there is antagonism, conflict, and every opportunity is used to hurt each other.
Love in its purest form is a sharing of joy. It asks nothing in return, it expects nothing; hence how can you feel hurt? Be afraid of your ego, be afraid of your lust, be afraid of your greed, be afraid of your possessiveness; be afraid of your jealousy—but there is no question of being afraid of love. Love is divine! Love is like light. When there is light, darkness cannot exist. When there is love, fear cannot exist.
Love can make a great celebration out of your life, but only love—not lust, not ego, not possessiveness, not jealousy, not dependence. I think I understand what you mean when you say it is not love that hurts. Nevertheless, the kind of love you are talking about is not so easy to find. So the process of learning and growing into a more mature love is often very painful. Is pain just an inevitable part of growth?
Growth is painful because you have been avoiding a thousand and one pains in your life. By avoiding them, you cannot destroy them; they go on accumulating. You go on swallowing your pains and they remain in your system. That's why growth is painful: when you start growing, when you decide to grow, you have to face all the pains that you have repressed. You cannot just bypass them.
You have been brought up in a wrong way. Unfortunately, until now, not a single society has existed on the earth which has not been repressive of pain. All societies depend on repression. Two things they repress: one is pain, another is pleasure. And they repress pleasure also because of pain. Their reasoning is that if you are not too happy, you will never become too unhappy; if great joy is destroyed, it comes only as a shadow of pleasure. Then you walk on the plain ground; you never move on the peaks and you never fall into the valleys. But then you are part of the living dead, then you are not alive.
Life exists between this point