will die. The protection can go on too long, then it becomes a prison. The protection must remain a protection while it is needed, and when the moment comes for the hard shell of the seed to die into the earth, it should die naturally so that the seed can sprout and life can be born. The ego is just a protective shell—the child needs it because he is helpless. The child needs it because he is weak; the child needs it because he is vulnerable and there are millions of forces all around. He needs protection, a home, a base. The whole world may be indifferent but he can always look toward home, and from there he can gather significance. But, with significance comes the ego. The child becomes egoistic, and with this ego arise all the problems you face. This ego will not allow you to fall in love. This ego would like everybody to surrender to you; it will not allow you to surrender to anybody—and love happens only when you surrender. When you force somebody else to surrender, it is hateful, destructive. It is not love. And if there is no love, your life will be without warmth, without any poetry in it. It may be prose, mathematical, logical, rational. But how can one live without poetry? Prose is okay, rationality is okay, it is utilitarian, needed—but living just through reason and logic can never be a celebration, can never be festive. And when life is not festive, it is boring. Poetry is needed—but for poetry you need surrender. You need to throw off this ego. If you can do it, if you can put it aside even for a few moments, your life will have glimpses of the beautiful, of the divine. Without poetry you cannot really live, you can only exist. Love is poetry. And if love is not possible, how can you be prayerful, meditative, aware? It becomes almost impossible. And without a meditative awareness, you will remain just a body; you will never become aware of the innermost soul. Only in prayerfulness, in a deep meditation and silence do you reach the peaks. That prayerful silence, that meditative awareness is the highest peak of experience—but love opens the door. Carl Gustav Jung, after a lifetime of studying thousands of people—thousands of cases of people who were ill, psychologically crippled, psychologically confused—said that he had never come across a psychologically crippled person who was not overwhelmed by his own family. The ego is born in the relationship with the father and mother, and it has to be tackled there. Otherwise you will go on cutting branches and leaves of the tree, and the root remains untouched. If you have settled with your father and mother, you have become mature. Now there is no ego. Now you understand that you were helpless, now you understand that you depended on others, that you were not the center of the world. In fact, you were completely dependent; you could not have survived otherwise. Understanding this, the ego by and by fades and, once you are not in conflict with life, you become loose and natural, you relax. Then you float. Then the world is not filled with enemies, it is a family, an organic unity. The world is not against you, you can float with it. Finding that the ego is nonsense, finding that the ego has no grounds to exist, one simply becomes egoless. There are people who come to me and they ask, “How to fall in love? Is there a way?” How to fall in love? They ask for a way, a method, a certain technique. They don't understand what they are asking. Falling in love means that now there is no way, no technique, no method. That's why it is called “falling in”—you are no longer the controller, you simply fall in. That's why people who are very head-oriented will say love is blind. Love is the only eye, the only vision— but they will say love is blind, and if you are in love they will think you have gone mad. It looks mad to the head-oriented person, because the mind is a great manipulator. Any situation in which control is lost looks dangerous to the mind. But there is a world of the human heart, there is a world of the human being and consciousness where no technique is possible. All technologies are possible with matter; with consciousness, no technologies are possible, and in fact, no control is possible. The very effort to control or to make a thing happen is egoistic.