Tes such nuisance, but by and by the glimmer in your eyes disappears. If you cannot look anywhere else with love, by and by you cannot look at your own wife with love. The capacity disappears. And the same has happened to her. The same has happened to the whole of humanity. Then life is a boredom; then everybody is just waiting for death; then there are people constantly thinking of committing suicide. Marcel has said somewhere that the only metaphysical problem facing humanity is suicide. And it is so, because people are so bored. It is simply amazing more people don't commit suicide, how they go on living. Life doesn't seem to give anything, all meaning seems to be lost, but still people go on dragging somehow, hoping that some day some miracle will happen and everything will be put right.

You have to put it right; nobody else is going to put it right for you. No Messiah is going to come, don't wait for one. You have to be a light unto yourself. Live more authentically. Drop the masks; they are a weight on your heart. Drop all falsities. Be exposed. Of course it is going to be troublesome, but that trouble is worth it because only after that trouble will you grow and become mature. And then nothing is holding back life. Each moment life reveals its newness, it is a constant miracle happening all around you, only you are hiding behind dead habits.

Become a buddha if you don't want to be bored. Live each moment as fully alert as possible, because only in full alertness will you be able to drop the mask. You have completely forgotten what your original face is. Even when you stand before the mirror in your bathroom and you are alone, nobody is there. Even standing before the mirror you don't see your original face in the mirror. There too, you go on deceiving yourself.

Existence is available for those who are available to existence. And then, I tell you, there is no boredom. Life is infinite delight. Would you please talk more about what you mean by intimacy? Particularly, when is staying together through difficult times in a relationship positive and when is it negative?

The positive relationship will face real problems. If you are really intimate with your partner, how can you avoid the fact that you become interested in another person? You have to say it. That's part of love, part of intimacy. You expose yourself totally and you don't hold anything back. Even if during the night you start talking to your girlfriend in your sleep, and you are saying such beautiful things, your wife wakes up. She starts staring at you, listening hard to what you are saying. When you are married, even in your dreams you remain afraid of your wife, so suddenly he woke up and became afraid. What was he saying? He felt his wife looking at him and with great presence of mind he pretended that he was still asleep!