Here is the repaired text:

Her husband's face, not to get disturbed. She is thinking of Alexander the Great, Ivan the Terrible, and looking at her husband, everything falls apart. He looks just like a mouse. Even in those beautiful moments which should be sacred, meditative, of deep silence—even then you are not alone with your beloved. There is a crowd. Your mind is thinking of somebody else, your partner's mind is thinking of somebody else. Then what you are doing is just robotlike, mechanical. Some biological force is enslaving you, and you call it love.

I have heard that early in the morning, a drunkard on the beach saw a man doing pushups. The drunkard walked around him, looked very closely from here and from there, and finally said, "I should not interfere in such an intimate affair, but I have to tell you that your girlfriend has gone!"

That seems to be the situation. When you are making love, is your woman really there? Is your man really there? Or are you just doing a ritual, something which has to be done, a duty to be fulfilled?

If you want a harmonious relationship with your partner, you will have to learn to be more meditative. Love alone is not enough. Love alone is blind; meditation gives it eyes. Meditation gives it understanding. And once your love is both love and meditation, you become fellow travelers. Then it is no longer an ordinary relationship. Then it becomes a friendliness on the path towards discovering the mysteries of life.

Man alone, woman alone, will find the journey very tedious and very long, as they have found it in the past. Because seeing this continuous conflict, all religions decided that those who wanted to seek should renounce the other—the monks should be celibate, the nuns should be celibate. But in five thousand years of history, how many monks and how many nuns have become realized souls?

You cannot even give me names enough to count on ten fingers. And there have been millions of monks and nuns of all religions: Buddhist, Hindu, Christian, Mohammedan. What has happened?

The path is not so long, the goal is not so far. People are living together and their spirits are full of wounds; hence, whatsoever they do is going to end in disaster. If you love a man, meditation will be the best present that you can give to him. If you love a woman, then the Kohinoor is nothing; meditation will be a far more precious gift, and it will make your life sheer joy.

We are potentially capable of sheer joy, but we don't know how to manage it. Alone, we are at the most sad. Together, it becomes really hell. Even a man like Jean-Paul Sartre, a man of great intelligence, has to say that the other is hell, that to be alone is better, you cannot make it with the other. He became so pessimistic that he said it is impossible to make it with the other, the other is hell. Ordinarily, he is right.

With meditation, the other becomes your heaven. But Jean-Paul Sartre had no idea of meditation. That is the misery of Western man. Western man is missing the flowering of life because he knows nothing about meditation, and Eastern man is missing because he knows nothing of love. And to me, just as man and woman are halves of one whole, so are love and meditation. Meditation is man; love is woman. In the meeting of meditation and love is the meeting of man and woman. And in that meeting, we create the transcendental human being which is neither man nor woman. And unless we create the transcendental man on the earth, there is not much hope.

You have spoken about the ultimate harmony to be found in what seem to be opposites, but I feel that hate destroys love and anger kills compassion. When these extremes are fighting inside me, how can I find the harmony?