Shoulders is Himalayan.
All the people around you have been helped, greatly helped to be what they are. You have been helped; now you want to help the children too? All that you can do is to be loving, nourishing. Be warm, be accepting. The child brings an unknown potential, and there is no way to figure out what he is going to be. So there is no possibility to suggest, "In this way you should help the child." Each child is unique, so there cannot be a general discipline for every child.
The right way is not to help the child at all. If you have real courage then please don't help the child. Love him, nourish him. Let him do what he wants to do. Let him go where he wants to go. Your mind will be tempted again and again to interfere, and with good excuses. The mind is very clever in rationalizing: "If you don't interfere there may be danger; the child may fall into the well if you don't stop him." But I say to you, it is better to let him fall into the well than to help him and destroy him.
It is a very rare possibility that the child falls into the well - and then too, it does not mean death; he can be taken out. And if you are really so concerned, the well can be covered; but don't help the child, and don't interfere. The well can be fenced, but don't interfere with the child. Your real concern should be to remove all dangers but don't interfere with the child; let him go on his way.
You will have to understand some significant growth patterns. Life has seven-year cycles, it moves in seven-year cycles just as the earth makes one rotation on its axis in twenty-four hours. Up to seven years, if a child can be left innocent, uncorrupted by the ideas of others, then to distract him from his potential growth becomes impossible. The child's first seven years are the most vulnerable. And they are in the hands of parents, teachers, priests. How to save children from parents, priests, teachers is a question of such enormous importance that it seems almost impossible to find out how to do it. It is not a question of helping the child. It is a question of protecting the child. If you have a child, protect the child from your