not only love; I will have only love, not hate.” You will be impoverished. Have a big heart, let them both be there. There is no need to create a fight between them; there is no fight. The fight comes from your mind, from your teachings, upbringing, conditioning. The whole world goes on saying to you, “Love, don’t hate.” How can you love without hate? Jesus says, “Love your enemies.” And I tell you, “Hate your lovers also.” Then it becomes a complete whole. Otherwise, Jesus’ saying is incomplete. He says, “Love your enemies.” You only hate your enemies, and he says you should love them also. But the other part is missing. I tell you, hate your friends also; hate your lovers also, and don’t be afraid. Then by and by you will see there is no difference between the enemy and the friend, because you hate and love the enemy and you love and hate the friend. It will be only a question of the coin upside down or downside up. Then the friend is the enemy and the enemy is the friend. Then distinctions simply disappear. Don’t create a fight inside, allow them both to be there. They both will be needed. Both will give you two wings; only then can you fly.
A very intricate, complex thing has to be understood: If you are not in love, you are lonely. If you are in love, really in love, you become alone. Loneliness is sadness; aloneness is not sadness. Loneliness is a feeling of incompleteness. You need someone and the needed one is not available. Loneliness is darkness, with no light in it. A dark house, waiting and waiting for someone to come and kindle the light. Aloneness means the feeling that you are complete. Nobody is needed; you are enough. And this happens in love. Lovers become alone. Through love you touch your inner completeness. Love makes you complete. Lovers share each other, but that is not love; it is a bargain. And there is continuous conflict and struggle. The struggle is based on the fact that everybody needs freedom. Love allows freedom; not only allows, but strengthens freedom. And anything that destroys freedom is not love. It must be something else. Love and freedom go together, they are two wings of the same bird. Whenever you see that your love is going against your freedom, then you are doing something else in the name of love. Let this be your criterion: freedom is the criterion; love gives you freedom, makes you free, liberates you. And once you are totally yourself, you feel grateful to the person who has helped you. That gratefulness is almost religious. When love deteriorates it becomes possessiveness, jealousy, struggle for power, politics, domination, manipulation – a thousand and one things, all ugly. When love soars high to the purest sky it is freedom, total freedom. If you are in love, the love I am talking about your very love will help the other to be integrated. Your very love will become a cementing force for the other. In your love the other will come together as a whole, unique and individual, because your love will give freedom. Under the shade of your love, under the protection of your love, the other will start growing. All growth needs love, but unconditional love. If love has conditions then growth cannot be total, because those conditions will come in the way. Love unconditionally, don’t ask anything in return. Much comes back to you on its own – that is another thing – but don’t be a beggar. In love, be an emperor. Just give it and see what happens: a thousandfold it comes back. But one has to learn the knack. Otherwise one remains a miser; one gives a little and waits for something to come back, and that waiting and expectation destroys the whole beauty of it. When you love a person, love the person as if the person is a god, not less than that. Never love a woman as a woman and never love a man as a man, because if you love a man as a man your love becomes bestial; if you love a woman as a woman your love becomes sexual. But if you love a man or a woman beyond sex, then love has become divine. Love has become the ultimate mystery of life. It is no longer a bargain. It is no longer an exchange. It is no longer a relationship. It is no longer two individuals meeting. It is God and God are meeting – not as gods, but as human beings. That is the ultimate transformation that love can bring about in your life.