Remember, only one thing is going to help you, and that is awareness - nothing else. Growth will remain painful if you don't accept life and love in all its ups and downs. The summer has to be accepted and the winter too. This is what I call meditation. Meditation is when you are emptied of all that is old and told and done to death. Then you see - or rather, then there is seeing, the birth of the new. But you will have to go through many pains, many agonies. It is because you have lived in a certain society, in a certain culture - Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, Indian, German, Japanese. These are different ways of avoiding pain and nothing else. You have been part of a culture that's why growth is painful because the culture tries to make you not grow; it wants you to remain juvenile. In the First World War and then again in the Second World War, psychologists became aware of a very strange fact: that man's average mental age is not more than twelve or thirteen. Even the man who is seventy, his mental age is somewhere between ten and thirteen. What does it mean? It simply means he stopped growing; the body continued but the mind stopped. No society allows grown-up minds. Why? Because grown-up minds are dangerous for the social structure; they are rebellious. They are dangerous for the social structure because they will see all the kinds of stupidities that go on in the name of culture, society, nation. Now see: the earth is one, and man still remains divided. All the problems of humanity can be solved if nations disappear. There is no problem actually; the basic problem is created by the boundaries of nations. Now the technology exists that can feed all the people of the world, there is no need for any starvation. But that is not possible because those boundaries won't allow it. A grown-up person will be able to see all this nonsense, a grown-up person will be able to see it through and through. A grown-up person cannot be reduced to a slave. Take hold of your being. Face your pains and throw off all kinds of bondages because only by being free of all bondages will you be able to sing your song and dance your dance. In spring, hundreds of flowers; in autumn, a harvest moon. In summer, a refreshing breeze; in winter, the snowflakes falling gently from the sky. If we can only hold on to these simple things, we would know what love is. We would understand that love is not a matter of hitting and running, but it is a matter of dancing together, singing together, meditating together. And it should not be just a mind thing, that the whole time you are thinking of how to get her to make love and then go to sleep. It should be a deeper involvement of your whole being, coming spontaneously. Beautiful music, fragrance, you are dancing hand in hand, you have again become small children playing with flowers. If lovemaking happens in this sacred atmosphere, it will have a different quality. You should understand that the woman is capable of multiple orgasms because she does not lose any energy. Man is capable of only one orgasm and he loses energy, looks depressed. Even the next morning you can see his hangover, and as he goes on growing older it becomes more and more difficult. This difference has to be understood.