Ges are there, universities, and it takes twenty-five years, twenty-six years to come out of the university with a postgraduate degree. But by that time you are no longer young. By that time you start having responsibilities: profession, family, marriage.
But during the time that you spend in the universities, before entering life, there is a long gap in which you are not engaged in any utilitarian, purposive activity. That has created the generation gap. Men and women become sexually mature—women by the age of thirteen, men by the age of fourteen—and they will be married perhaps ten or twelve years afterwards. These twelve years have made girlfriends and boyfriends possible.
It is a great opportunity for the future to understand the whole phenomenon and its psychology. You have the choice to change the old habits, to create trouble but drop old habits. Every man needs to be aware of many women. Every woman needs the experience of many other men before deciding to marry. Their experience will help them to find the right person with whom they can melt and merge without any difficulty.
"Meanwhile," you are saying, "I observed in me this destructive energy and I felt that I somehow enjoyed it!" Everybody has destructive energy, because energy, if left to itself, is bound to be destructive unless it is used with awareness and becomes creative. But the most important thing that you are saying is that, "Somehow I enjoyed it."
Then how are you going to change it? With anything that you enjoy you are bound to remain on the same level; you cannot change it, because you may not enjoy the change. And all this has come to your mind only because your girlfriend told you that you are "a little boring, very dependent, and a victim." You have energy. To enjoy destructive energy is suicidal, to enjoy destructive energy as destructive is in the service of death. If you are aware of it you have to go through a transformation. Use your energy creatively; perhaps that will make you less boring, more interesting, less dependent, less of a victim. And the most important part will be that you will not feel guilty and depressed. No creative person feels depressed and guilty. His participation in the universe through his creative actions makes him tremendously fulfilled and gives him dignity. That is the very birthright of every human being, but very few know it.
But you have also been told for thousands of years that, "If you really love then your love has to be permanent." I don't see that anything in life has the quality of being permanent. Love cannot be an exception. So don't expect that love has to be permanent. It will make your love life more beautiful, because you know today you are together, tomorrow perhaps you will have to depart. Love comes like a fresh, fragrant breeze into your home, fills it with freshness and fragrance, remains as long as existence allows it and then moves out. You should not try to close all your doors or the same fresh breeze will become absolutely stale. That's what people's lives have become—stale, ugly—and the reason lies in their idea of permanent love. In life everything is changing. And change is beautiful; it gives you more and more experience, more and more awareness, more and more maturity. All the joy and fun has gone out of my relationship, although I feel the love is still there and I don't really want us to break up. How can we put that joy and fun back into our relationship?
There is some misunderstanding in your mind. The joy is not gone, joy has never been there—it was something else. It is excitement that has gone, but you thought that excitement was joy. The joy will come now; when the excitement subsides, only then does joy come. Joy is a very silent phenomenon; it is not excitement at all, it is not feverish at all. It is tranquil, calm and cool. But this misunderstanding is not unique to you; it has become very prevalent. People think that excitement is joy. It is just an escape from misery.