A cycle of seven years is immensely important because it will prepare you for the coming seven years. If you have done your homework right, if you have played with your sexual energy just in the spirit of a sportsman—and during those years, that is the only spirit you will have—you will not become a pervert, and all kinds of strange things will not come to your mind. Instead, you will be moving naturally with the other sex, the other sex is moving with you. There will be no hindrance, and you will not be doing anything wrong against anybody. Your conscience will be clear because nobody has put into your head ideas of what is right, what is wrong: you are simply being whatever you are.

Then from fourteen to twenty-one, your sex matures. And this is significant to understand: if the rehearsal has gone well, in the seven years when your sex matures a very strange thing happens that you may not have ever thought about, because you have not been given the chance. I said to you that the second seven-year cycle, from seven to fourteen, gives you a glimpse of foreplay. The third seven-year cycle will give you a glimpse of afterplay. You are still together with girls or boys, but now a new phase starts in your being: you start falling in love.

It is still not a biological interest. You are not interested in producing children, you are not interested in becoming husbands and wives, no. These are the years of romantic play. You are more interested in beauty, in love, in poetry, in sculpture, which are all different phases of romanticism. And unless a person has some romantic quality he will never know what afterplay is. Sex is just in the middle. The longer the foreplay, the better the possibility of reaching the climax; the better the possibility of reaching the climax, the better opening for afterplay.

And unless a couple knows afterplay they will never know what sex in its completion is. Now there are sexologists who are teaching foreplay. A taught foreplay is not the real thing, but they are teaching it; at least they have recognized the fact that without foreplay sex cannot reach the climax. But they are at a loss how to teach afterplay, because when a man has reached the climax he is no longer interested. He is finished, the job is done. For afterplay to happen it needs a romantic mind, a poetic mind, a mind that knows how to be thankful, how to be grateful. The person, the woman or the man who has brought you to such a climax, needs some gratitude: afterplay is your gratitude. And unless there is afterplay, it simply means your sex is incomplete; and incomplete sex is the cause of all the troubles that a human being goes through.

Sex can become orgasmic only when foreplay and afterplay are completely balanced. Just in their balance the climax turns into orgasm. And the word "orgasm" has to be understood. It means that your whole being—body, mind, soul, everything—becomes involved, organically involved. Then it becomes a moment of meditation. To me, if your sex does not become finally a moment of meditation, you have not known what sex is. You have only heard about it, you have read about it; and the people who have been writing about it know nothing about it. I have read hundreds of books on sexology by people who are thought to be great experts, and they are "experts," but they know nothing about the innermost shrine where meditation blossoms.

Just as children are born from ordinary sex, meditation is born out of extraordinary sex. Animals can produce children; there is nothing special about it. It is only man who can produce the experience of meditation as the center of his orgasmic feeling. This is possible only if from the ages of fourteen to twenty-one young people are allowed to have romantic freedom.

From twenty-one to twenty-eight is the time when they can settle. They can choose a partner. And they are capable of choosing now; through all the experience of the past two cycles of their growth, they can choose the right partner. There is nobody else who can do it for you. It is something that is more like a hunch—not arithmetic, not astrology, not palmistry, not I Ching, nothing else is going to do. It is a hunch. After coming in contact with many, many people, suddenly something clicks that had never clicked with anybody else.

And it clicks with so much certainty, and so absolutely, you cannot even doubt it. Even if you try to doubt it, you cannot, the certainty is so tremendous. With this click you settle. Between twenty-one and twenty-eight—somewhere, if everything goes smoothly in the way I am talking about, without interference from others—then you settle.

And the most pleasant period of life comes from twenty-eight to thirty-five—the most joyous, the most peaceful and harmonious, because two persons start melting and merging into each other. From thirty-five to forty-two, a new step, a new door opens. If up to the age of thirty-five you have felt deep harmony, an orgasmic feeling, and you have discovered meditation through it, then from thirty-five to forty-two you will help each other go more and more into that meditation without sex, because at this point sex starts looking childish, juvenile.

The age of forty-two is the time when a person should be able to know exactly who he is. From forty-two to forty-nine he goes deeper and deeper into meditation, more and more into himself, and helps the partner in the same way. The partners become friends. There is no more "husband" and no more "wife" that time has passed. It has given its richness to your life; now there is something growing that is even higher than love. That is friendliness, a compassionate relationship to help the other to go deeper into himself or herself, to become more independent, to become more alone, just like two tall trees standing separate but still close to each other, or two pillars in a temple supporting the same roof—standing so close, but also so separate and independent and alone.

From forty-nine to fifty-six this aloneness becomes your focus of being. Everything else in the world loses meaning. The only remaining meaningful thing is this aloneness. From fifty-six to sixty-three you become absolutely what you are going to become: the potential blossoms, and from sixty-three to seventy you start getting ready to drop the body. Now you know you are not the body, you know you are not the mind either. The body was known as separate from you somewhere around the time when you were thirty-five. That the mind is separate from you was known near the time when you were forty-nine. Now, everything else drops except the witnessing self. Just the pure awareness, the flame of awareness remains with you—and this is the preparation for death.

Seventy is the natural life span for human beings. And if things move in this natural course then one dies with tremendous joy, with great ecstasy, feeling immensely blessed that life has not been meaningless, that at least one has found his home. And because of this richness, this fulfillment, one is capable of blessing the whole of existence. Just to be near such a person at the time of death is a great opportunity. You will feel, as the person leaves the body, as if some invisible flowers are falling upon you. Although you cannot see them, you can feel them. It is sheer joy, so pure that even to have a little taste of it is enough to transform your whole life.

THE CANDLE OF AWARENESS
A questioner has asked, "How to start the journey towards love?"

Once you ask the question the journey has already started; you are in the journey. This has to be recognized—unconsciously, you are in the journey: that's why it feels as if you have to start it. Recognize it, become conscious about it, and the very recognition becomes the beginning.

You are always moving, going somewhere—knowingly, unknowingly.