To relax into silence and meditation. Most programs take place in modern, air-conditioned facilities and include a variety of individual sessions, courses, and workshops covering everything from creative arts to holistic health treatments, personal transformation and therapy, esoteric sciences, the Zen approach to sports and recreation, relationship issues, and significant life transitions for men and women. Individual sessions and group workshops are offered throughout the year, alongside a full daily schedule of meditations. Outdoor cafes and restaurants within the resort grounds serve both traditional Indian fare and a choice of international dishes, all made with organically grown vegetables from the commune's own farm. The campus has its own private supply of safe, filtered water. See www.osho.com/resort for more information, including travel tips, course schedules, and guesthouse bookings. For more information about Osho and his work, see: www.osho.com a comprehensive Web site in several languages that includes an online tour of the Meditation Resort and a calendar of its course offerings, a catalog of books and tapes, a list of Osho information centers worldwide, and selections from Osho's talks. Or contact: Osho International New York e-mail: oshointernational@oshointernational.com For copyright © 2008 by Osho International Foundation, Switzerland All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Harmony Books, an imprint of the Crown Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York. Harmony Books is a registered trademark and the Harmony Books colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc. Osho is a registered trademark of Osho International Foundation, used with permission/license. The material in this book is selected from various discourses by Osho given to a live audience. All of the Osho discourses have been published in full as books and are also available as original audio recordings. Audio recordings and the complete text archive can be found via the online OSHO Library at www.osho.com. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Osho, 1931–1990. Being in love: how to love with awareness and relate without fear / Osho.— 1st ed. p. cm. 1. Love—Religious aspects. I. Title. BP605.R34B445 2008 299'.93—dc22 2007036736 eISBN: 978-0-307-40988-1 v3.0