Very well, let's begin. The society has divided you into two parts: one with respect, the other without. The false part gets all the respect because it is created by society. It rejects the real part that comes from nature, which is beyond any society or culture. Each child is trained to be a subservient slave and societies break the very spine of every child so they become spineless. They cannot raise their voice, question anything, or believe they have control over their life.

This false love is created by society. You are told to love your mother "because she is your mother" - as if being a mother has some intrinsic quality or obligation you should love her. But it has been accepted that the mother should be loved. 

My emphasis is that the mother should be loving, and no child should ever be told to love somebody unless it happens on its own. Yes, the mother, father, family can create a milieu without saying anything; the whole energy can generate, can trigger your own forces of love.

But never say to anybody that love is a duty. It is not. Duty is a false substitute for love. When you cannot love, society goes on supplying duties. They may appear to be love, but inside there is nothing loving in it; on the contrary, it is only social formality. And you become so accustomed to social formalities that you forget completely that there are things which are waiting to happen in your life but you don't give space, you don't allow love to blossom in you.

Hence, you don't know that centering and love are one thing. Centering is more appealing to the intellectual. Nothing has to be believed; there is nobody else to whom you have to surrender. It is because of the other that every love affair becomes a tragedy. 

In Indian literature, there are no tragedies. In my student days, I was asking my professors, "Why are tragedies missing in Indian literature?" And not a single teacher or professor was able to say something significant about it. They simply shrugged their shoulders and said, "You find such questions. I have been in this university for thirty years and nobody has asked."

I said, "To me, it seems very obvious that the question has deep roots in the culture." In all other countries except India, there are tragedies – beautiful stories, but still tragedies. This is one of the first things you have to go into if you want to understand what love is. "Love" as people ordinarily use the word is not love; it is lust. And lust is bound to cause hurt because to desire somebody as an object is to offend that person. It is an insult, it is violent. When you move with lust toward someone, how long can you pretend it is love?

Love is just the opposite of it: respecting the other as an end unto himself or herself. When you love someone as an end unto himself, then there is no feeling of hurt; you become enriched through it. Love makes everybody rich. Secondly, love can only be true if there is no ego hiding behind it; otherwise, love becomes only an ego trip. It is a subtle way to dominate. 

Parents never say that their children are their possessions, they never say that they want to dominate the children, but that's actually what they do. They say they want to help, they say they want them to be intelligent, healthy, blissful, but - and that "but" is a great but - it has to be according to their ideas. Children have to be happy according to the parents' expectations. 

Children have to be intelligent, but at the same time obedient, too. This is asking for the impossible! The intelligent person cannot be obedient; the obedient person has to lose some of his intelligence. Intelligence can say yes only when it feels deep agreement with you. It cannot say yes just because you are bigger, more powerful, authoritative - a father, a mother, a priest, a politician. 

Intelligence is rebellious, and no parents would like their children to be rebellious. Rebellion will come, and it will have to come. If you don't let it come when it has to, it will come later on in uglier forms.