CONTENTS Title Page Introduction: What Is Love? PART I. The Journey from “Me” to “We” Understanding the Nature and Nurture of Love Beyond Dependency and Dominance—Breaking Out of the Shell of the Ego The Natural Stages of Life and Loving The Candle of Awareness PART II. Love Is a Breeze Making the Most of Romance Nonsense Ideas in Your Head "Love Hurts" and Other Misunderstandings Attraction and Opposition Dropping Out of the Lonely Hearts Club Soul Mates or Cell Mates? Love and the Art of Non-doing PART III. From Relationship to Relating—Love as a State of Being “Love” Is a Verb Couples Counseling—Insights for Living and Growing in Love Only Love Remains About the Author OSHO International Meditation Resort For More Information Also by Osho Copyright INTRODUCTION: WHAT IS LOVE? It is unfortunate that we have to ask this question. In the natural course of things everybody would know what love is. But, in fact, nobody knows, or only very rarely does somebody know, what love is. Love has become one of the rarest experiences. Yes, it is talked about. Films and stories are written about it, songs are composed about it, on the television shows you will see it, on the radio, in magazines—a great industry exists to supply you with ideas of what love is. Many people are involved in the industry of helping people understand what love is. But still, love remains an unknown phenomenon. And it should be one of the most known. It is almost like somebody asking, "What is food?" Would you not be surprised if somebody came and asked you that question? Only if somebody has been starved from the very beginning and has never tasted food would the question be relevant. It is the same with the question, "What is love?" Love is the food of the soul, but you have been starved. Your soul has not received love at all, so you don't know the taste. So the question is relevant, but it is unfortunate. The body has received food so the body continues; but the soul has not received food so the soul is dead, or is not born yet, or is always on its deathbed. When we are born we are born fully equipped with the capacity to love and to be loved. Each child is born full of love and knows perfectly what it is. There is no need to tell a child what love is. But the problem arises because the mother and the father don't know what love is. No child receives the parents that he deserves—no child ever receives the parents that he deserves; those parents simply don't exist on the earth. And by the time this child becomes a parent, he too will have lost the capacity to love. I have heard about a small valley where children were born and within three months they all became blind. It was a small, primitive society, and a fly existed there which caused an infection and blindness in the eyes, so the whole community had gone blind. Every child was born with eyes that functioned perfectly well, but within three months at most they had gone blind because of these flies. Now, somewhere later in life those children must have asked, "What are eyes? What do you mean when you use the word 'eye'? What is vision? What is seeing? What do you mean?" And the question would have been relevant. Those children had been born with sight, but they had lost it somewhere on the way of their growth. That's what has happened to love. Every child is born with as much love as one can contain, with more love than one can contain, with overflowing love. A child is born as love; a child is made of the stuff called love. But the parents cannot give love. They have their own hangovers—their parents never loved them. The parents can only pretend. They can talk about love. They can say, "We love you very much," but what they actually do is unloving. The way they behave, the way they treat the child is insulting; there is no respect. No parent respects the child. Who ever thinks of respecting a child? A child is not thought to be a person at all. A child is thought of as a problem. If he keeps quiet, he is good; if he does not scream or cause any mischief, good; if he simply keeps out of the parents' way, perfectly good. That's what a child should be. But there is no respect and there is no love. The parents have not known what love is. The wife has not loved the husband, the husband has not loved the wife. Love does not exist between them—instead there is domination, possessiveness, jealousy, and all kinds of poisons that destroy love. Just as a certain poison can destroy your vision, so the poison of possessiveness and jealousy destroys love. Love is a fragile flower. It has to be protected, it has to be strengthened, it has to be watered; only then does it become strong. And the child's love is very fragile—naturally, because the child is fragile, his body is fragile. Do you think a child left on his own will be able to survive? Just think how helpless the human child is—if a child is left on his own, it is next to impossible that he will survive. He will die, and that is what is happening to love. Love is left alone, untended. The parents can't love, they don't know what love is, they have never flowed in love. Just think of your own parents—and remember, I am not saying that they are responsible. They are victims just as you are victims; their own parents were the same. And so on…you can go back to Adam and Eve and God the father! It seems that even God the father was not very respectful to Adam and Eve. That's why from the very beginning he started commanding them, "Do this" and "Don't do that." He started doing the ABC of politics. Deep down the child starts hating the parents because he is not respected; deep down he starts feeling frustrated because he is not loved as he is. He is expected to do certain things, and only then will he be loved. Love has conditions; he is not worthy as he is. First he has to become worthy, only then will the parents' love be given. So to become "worthy" the child starts becoming false; he loses any sense of his own intrinsic value. His respect for himself is lost, and by and by he starts feeling that he is guilty. Many times the idea comes to the mind of a child, "Are these my real parents? Is it possible they have adopted me? Maybe they are deceiving me, because there seems to be no love." A thousand and one times he sees the anger in their eyes, the ugly anger on the faces of his parents, and for such small things that he cannot understand the proportion of anger caused by these small things. Just for very small things he sees the parents' rage—he cannot believe it, it is so unjust and unfair! But he has to surrender, he has to bow down, he has to accept it as a necessity. By and by, his capacity for love is killed. Love grows only in love. Love needs a milieu of love—that is the most fundamental thing to be remembered. Only in a milieu of love does love grow; it needs the same kind of pulsation around. If the mother is loving, if the father is loving—not only to the child, if they are loving to each other too, if the home has an atmosphere where love flows—the child will start functioning as a love-being, and he will never ask the question, "What is love?" He will know it from the very beginning, it will become his foundation. But that doesn't happen. It is unfortunate,