But it has not happened up to now. And children learn the ways of their parents—their nagging, their conflict. Just go on watching yourself. If you are a woman, watch—you may be repeating, almost identically, the ways your mother used to behave. Watch your self when you are with your boyfriend or your husband: What are you doing? Are you not repeating a pattern? If you are a man, watch: What are you doing? Are you not behaving just like your father? Are you not doing the same nonsense that he used to do? Once upon a time you were surprised—“How can my father do this?”—and now you are doing the same. People go on repeating; people are imitators. The human being is a monkey. You are repeating your father or your mother, and that has to be dropped. Only then will you know what love is, otherwise you will remain corrupted.

I cannot define what love is because there is no definition of love. It is one of those indefinables like birth, like death, like God, like meditation. It is one of those indefinables—I cannot define it. I cannot say that “this is love,” I cannot show it to you. It is not a visible phenomenon. It cannot be dissected, cannot be analyzed; it can only be experienced, and only through experience do you know what it is. But I can show you the way to experience it.

The first step is, get rid of your parents. And by that I don’t mean any disrespect toward your parents, no. I will be the last person to say that. And I don’t mean you should get rid of your physical parents, I mean you have to get rid of your parental voices inside, your program inside, your tapes inside. Efface them… and you will be simply surprised that if you get rid of your parents from your inner being, you become free. For the first time you will be able to feel compassion for your parents, otherwise not; you will remain resentful.

Every person feels resentful toward his or her parents. How can you not be resentful when they have done so much harm to you? And they have not harmed you knowingly—they wished all good for you, they wanted to do everything for your well-being. But what can they do? Just by wanting something, it doesn’t happen. Just by good wishes, nothing happens. They were well-wishers, that is true; there is no doubt about it; every parent wants the child to have all the joys of life. But what can they do? They have not known any joy themselves. They are robots, and knowingly or unknowingly, deliberately or unintentionally, they will create an atmosphere in which their children will sooner or later be turned into robots.

If you want to become a human being and not a machine, get rid of your parents. And you will have to be watchful. It is hard work, arduous work; you cannot do it instantly. You will have to be very careful in your behavior. Watch and see when your mother is there, functioning through you—stop that, move away from it. Do something absolutely new that your mother could not even have imagined. For example, your boyfriend is looking at some other woman with great appreciation in his eyes. Now, watch what you are doing. Are you doing the same as your mother would have done when your father looked at another woman appreciatively? If you do that, you will never know what love is, you will simply be repeating a story. It will be the same act being played by different actors, that’s all; the same rotten act being repeated again and again and again. Don’t be an imitator, get out of it. Do something new. Do something that your mother could not have conceived of. Do something new that your father could not have conceived of. This newness has to be brought to your being, then your love will start flowing.

So the first essential is getting rid of your parents.

The second essential is this: People think that they can love only when they find a worthy partner—nonsense! You will never find one. People think that they will love only when they find a perfect man or a perfect woman. Nonsense! You will never find them, because perfect women and perfect men don’t exist. And if they exist, they won’t bother about your love. They will not be interested.

I have heard about a man who remained a bachelor his whole life because he was in search of a perfect woman. When he was seventy, somebody asked, “You have been traveling and traveling—from New York to Kathmandu, from Kathmandu to Rome, from Rome to London you have been searching. Could you not find a perfect woman? Not even one?”

The old man became very sad. He said, "Yes, once I did. One day, long ago, I came across a perfect woman."

The inquirer said, "Then what happened? Why didn’t you get married?"

Sadly, the old man said, "What to do? She was looking for a perfect man."

And remember, when two beings are perfect, their love need is not the same as your love need. It has a totally different quality.

You don’t understand even the love that is possible for you, so you will not be able to understand the love that happens to a Buddha, or the love that is flowing from a Lao Tzu toward you—you will not be able to understand it.

First you have to understand the love that is a natural phenomenon. Even that has not happened. First you have to understand the natural, and then the transcendental. So the second thing to remember is, never be in search of a perfect man or a perfect woman. That idea too has been put into your mind—that unless you find a perfect man or a perfect woman you will not be happy. So you go on looking for the perfect, and you don’t find it, so you will remain unhappy.

An alive and loving person simply loves. Love is a natural function.
So the second thing to remember is, don’t ask for perfection; otherwise, you will not find any love flowing in you. On the contrary, you will become unloving. People who demand perfection are very unloving people, neurotic. Even if they can find a lover, they demand perfection, and the love is destroyed because of that demand.

Once a man loves a woman or a woman loves a man, demands immediately enter. The woman starts demanding that the man should be perfect, just because he loves her. As if he has committed a sin! Now he has to be perfect, now he has to drop all his limitations—suddenly, just because of this woman? Now he cannot be human? Either he has to become superhuman or he has to become phony, false, a cheat.

Naturally, to become superhuman is very difficult, so people become cheaters. They start pretending and acting and playing games. In the name of love, people are just playing games. So the second thing to remember is never to demand perfection from your loved one. Love is not about having everything perfect; it's about accepting and loving your partner exactly as they are.