Ogdates have been opened in you. Subtle sources of energy that were not open before have become open, and your whole energy becomes sexual, colored with sex. You think sex, you sing sex, you walk sex-everything becomes sexual. Every act is colored. This happens; you have not done anything about it. It is natural. And transcendence is also natural. If sex is lived totally, with no condemnation, with no idea of getting rid of it, then at the age of forty-two-just as at the age of fourteen the door to sex gets opened and the whole energy becomes sexual, at the age of forty-two or near about-those floodgates start to close again. And that too is as natural as sex becoming alive; it starts disappearing. Sexuality is transcended not by any effort on your part. If you make any effort that will be repressive, because it has nothing to do with you. It is inbuilt-in your body, in your biology. You are born as sexual beings; nothing is wrong in it. That is the only way to be born. To be human is to be sexual. When you were conceived, your mother and your father were not praying, they were not listening to some priest's sermon. They were not in church, they were making love. Even to think that your mother and father were making love when you were conceived seems to be difficult, I know, but they were making love; their sexual energies were meeting and merging into each other. Then you were conceived; in that deep sexual act you were conceived. The first cell was a sexual cell, and then out of that cell other cells have arisen. But each cell remains sexual, basically. Your whole body is sexual, made of sex cells. Now they are millions. Remember it: you exist as a sexual being. Once you accept it, the conflict that has been there since your childhood starts dissolving. So the real thing is not how to transcend sex but how to transcend this perverted ideology of the society-this fear of sex, this repression of sex, this obsession with sex. Sex is beautiful. Sex in itself is a natural, rhythmic phenomenon. It happens when the child is ready to be conceived, and it is good that it happens; otherwise life would not exist. Life exists through sex; sex is its medium. If you understand life, if you love life, you will know that sex is sacred, holy. Then you live it, then you delight in it; and as naturally as it has come into being, it goes of its own accord. But it does not happen that way. Instead, you will be surprised when I say forty-two. You know people who are seventy, eighty, and yet they have not gone beyond their obsession with sex. You know "dirty old men." They are victims of the society because they could not be natural. It is a hangover, because they repressed their sexuality when they should have enjoyed and delighted in it. In those moments of sexual delight they were not totally in it. They were half-hearted. Whenever you are half-hearted in anything, it lingers longer. If you are sitting at your table and eating, and if you eat only half-heartedly, then your hunger will remain. Then you will continue to think about food the whole day. You can try fasting and you will see: you will continuously think about food! But if you have eaten well, and when I say that, I don't mean only that you have stuffed your stomach. Then it is not necessarily the case that you have eaten well.