is looking there. If the rosebush thinks, “I will show my roses only when people are around,” then it will not have anything to show. It will not have anything to share, because whatever you can share has first to be created, and all creativity arises out of the depths of aloneness.
So let this aloneness be a womb, and enjoy and delight in it; don’t feel that you are doing something wrong. It is a question of attitude and approach. Don’t give it a wrong interpretation. It need not be sorrowful. It can be tremendously peaceful and blissful. It depends on you.
The Fire Test of Truth
No relationship can truly grow if you go on holding back. If you remain clever and go on safeguarding and protecting yourself, only personalities meet, and the essential centers remain alone. Then just your mask is related, not you.
Whenever such a thing happens, there are four persons in the relationship, not two. Two false persons go on meeting, and the two real persons remain worlds apart.
Risk is there. If you become true, nobody knows whether this relationship will be capable of understanding truth, authenticity; whether this relationship will be strong enough to stand in the storm. There is a risk, and because of it, people remain very guarded. They say things which should be said; they do things which should be done. Love becomes more or less like a duty. But then the reality remains hungry, and the essence is not fed. So the essence becomes more and more sad. The lies of the personality are a very heavy burden on the essence, on the soul. The risk is real, and there is no guarantee for it, but I will tell you that the risk is worth taking.
At the most, the relationship can break, at the most. But it is better to be separate and to be real rather than being unreal and together because then it is never going to be satisfying. Benediction will never come out of it. You will remain hungry and thirsty, and you will go on dragging, just waiting for some miracle to happen.
If you are unhappy, you will attract many people, because they are also unhappy and something fits. There is a messiah, a therapist in everybody! So when you are in misery somebody comes and sympathizes and feels very good, high. Somebody is in pain, somebody is the one to help; he feels very egoistic about it. So that’s how people become interested in each other. Somebody is in pain, somebody else is the one to help.
Remember, sympathy is not love, and if somebody is sympathetic to you, beware! It is not love, and the sympathy will remain only as long as you remain in misery. Once you become happy, the sympathy will disappear, because sympathy cannot go uphill. It is just like water flowing downhill; it goes towards people who are more unhappy than you. Sympathy never rises. It has no pumping system; your sympathy cannot move towards a higher person than you.
So remember this, and resist the temptation to ask for sympathy. That temptation is there, because when one feels that love is not happening, one starts settling for less. One starts moving around in sadness and asking for sympathy in subtle ways. Never do that. That is the greatest degradation that can happen to a human being. Be happy.
It will take a little time for the love to happen, because most people are sadists, miserable themselves and trying to prove that they are messiahs, helpers, solving other people’s miseries. But if you are happy and a relationship happens, you feel good, you share, but you are not dependent on it. You don’t become a slave, you don’t become addicted to it, because you can be happy without it. A good relationship is a sharing; there is no dependence. Both partners remain totally free and independent. Nobody possesses, there is no need. It is a free gift.