Oman then she will be satisfied but that looks very hurting to the ego. Or you have to provide her with an electric vibrator. But once she knows the vibrator, you are useless because the vibrator gives her such tremendous orgasmic experiences that you cannot give. It seems there has been some mistake by nature itself: men and women are not equal in their orgasmic capacity. You are fully satisfied but have you ever bothered whether your beloved has found even a single orgasm? Because she has not found a single orgasm, she can remain devoted to you, monogamous. But if she knows what orgasmic experience is, she will also want, once in a while, to be with another man. If you really love your woman, you will help her to come out of her old conditionings, which are far deeper because man himself is responsible. Man himself does not have those conditionings; his morality is very superficial and a hypocrisy. But the woman's morality has gone very deep. Man has been enforcing it from the very childhood. If you feel to change it, it is your responsibility; and particularly a man of your understanding should be able to see what I am saying. It is your responsibility to bring Neelam also out into the sun, into the rain, into the wind, so that she can drop all her conditionings. You have to help her; you have to teach her how to enjoy the pizza place, and not go on eating Punjabi food her whole life. How to enjoy Japanese food or Chinese food? If men and women really love each other, they will help each other to be unconditioned from the past. Man does not have many conditionings, and they are superficial. He can drop them very easily, the way you drop your clothes. The woman has been conditioned so much that it is not like dropping her clothes, it is like peeling her skin. It is hard, and unless you really love a woman you will not be able to help much. It will be very difficult on her own to get rid of all those deep rooted conceptions. Love lived in an atmosphere of freedom will transcend sex naturally, easily, effortlessly. Love will remain, sex will be gone, and then love has a purity and a beauty and a sacredness of its own. Sitting on a bus in New York, a prim old lady was shocked to overhear an Italian say to another, "Emma come-a first. I come-a next. Two ass-a come-a together. I come-a again. Two ass-a come-a together again. I come-a once more. Peepee twice. Then I come-a for the last time." When the Italian was finished, the red-faced old maid turned to a policeman sitting nearby and said, "Are you not going to arrest that terrible old man?" "What for?" asked the policeman. "For spelling Missisippi?" Take life more joyously and more jokingly. Let your whole life become a beautiful joke. There is nothing wrong in nature, and to be natural is to be religious. You both are intelligent, and I hope that you will prove my hypothesis that you can love each other, and yet once in a while have different affairs - joyously, not reluctantly. Not because I am saying it, but out of your own understanding. Sex is a subtle subject, delicate, because centuries of exploitation, corruption, centuries of perverted ideas and conditioning are associated with the word "sex." The very word creates confusion, chaos. Humanity has lived under the influence of very wrong ideas. So the first thing to consider is, why do you ask how to go beyond your sexual feelings? Why do you want in the first place to transcend your sexuality? You are using a beautiful term - "go beyond" - but out of a hundred possibilities, ninety-nine are that you mean, "How to repress my sexual feelings?" A person who has understood that sex can be transcended is not even worried about going beyond it, because transcendence comes through experience. You cannot manage it. It is not something that you have to do. You simply pass through many experiences, and those experiences make you more and more mature. Have you watched that at a certain age, sex becomes important? Not that you