Every language is called the “mother tongue,” because the father has no chance to speak to the child when the mother is present! Mother speaks, father listens—the child learns the language from the mother. And it is not only the language but all her attitudes.

But life as we have lived it up to now is mostly managed by men. It is a man-made society and for centuries it has had no place for women. That’s why it is so strange that women are not in sympathy with other women. But their minds are also conditioned in such a way that they are sympathetic to the man.

Once in a while it also happens, as it has happened with the questioner, that deep down a woman carries her mother’s feelings. The mother has been against men—and I don’t see why she should not be; there is every reason. It is absolutely well-founded, but it is not going to help human society or create a better future.

The past is past. You should start looking at men with fresh eyes—and particularly in this place, where our whole effort is to expose the conditioning, to dehypnotize ourselves. All the rubbish that you are carrying has to be thrown away; you have to become unburdened and light so that you can gain your own understanding, your own insight.

And the women in this community are not uneducated. You are financially capable of being independent—and as intelligent as any man. There is no need for you to be angry against men. If your mother was angry—perhaps she was not educated, perhaps she was not financially able to be independent. She wanted to fly in the open sky but she was encaged. You are not.

This is one of the reasons why I cannot communicate to the vast majority of the people of India: because the man will not be willing to listen to me; it goes against his domination, his power. And the woman cannot understand me; she is not educated. Even if she can understand me, she is not financially able to be independent; she cannot revolt against the man-made society. In most parts of India there is nothing like a women’s liberation movement—not even the talk of it. No woman ever thinks that there is any possibility of liberation. She has lost all hope.

But your situation is different. You come from a country where women can receive an education, and education makes you financially able to be independent. You need not be a housewife; it is not necessary for you to be married. You can live with someone you love without any marriage. The woman has to fight for it, the woman has to make marriage an absolutely personal affair in which the government, the state, the society, nobody has any business to interfere.

You are in a totally different space than your mother. Now, carrying her anger and her conditioning is simply stupid. Just forgive her and forget her, because if you go on having this conditioning of anger against men, you will never feel complete, because a woman or a man who is incapable of loving remains incomplete, frustrated.

As it is, it creates a vicious circle. Your anger prevents you from love, because love means dropping anger against men and moving to the diametrically opposite polarity—instead of anger, love; instead of hate, love. A quantum leap needs courage. The vicious circle is that because of your angry conditioning you cannot love men, and because you cannot love men you become more and more frustrated, and your frustration makes you more angry—this is the vicious circle.

Anger brings frustration; frustration makes you more angry, more violent, more against men. That brings more anger, and the circle goes on becoming deeper and deeper. To get out of it becomes almost impossible.

You have to begin from the very beginning. The first thing is to try and understand that your mother lived in a different situation. Perhaps her anger was justified. Your situation is different, and carrying your mother within your mind is simply unreasonable. You have to live your life; you are not to live your mother’s life. She suffered; now why do you want to make more suffering in the world? Why do you want to be a martyr?

Have every compassion towards your mother—I am not saying to get angry at your mother that she conditioned you. That will be again keeping you in anger, just changing the object from men to the mother. No, you need to drop the anger completely. Your mother needs your compassion; she must have suffered, and that created anger in her. But you are not suffering. You can put your anger aside and you have a fresh look at men. If their forefathers have caused women to suffer it is beyond their power to undo it. What has happened, has happened. Now they can feel a deep apology in their hearts for what man has done to women. These types of men are a different category of people.

I am trying to create every possibility for the emergence of a new kind of human being who is not contaminated by the past, who is discontinuous with the past. It is a difficult job; it is almost like hitting my head against the wall. But I am determined to go on hitting—I trust in my head! And the wall is very old and ancient. It may hurt me, but it has to fall someday; its time is finished. It has already lived more than its life span.

So meditate more, and be aware when your mother’s voice starts speaking to your mind. Slowly, slowly put that voice to sleep. Don’t listen to it; it will spoil your whole life. You have to learn how to love. And when he is loved, the man becomes more polite, nicer, a gentleman. He loses his corners, becomes softer.

Through love, the woman starts blossoming; otherwise she remains a closed bud. Only in love, when the sun of love rises, she opens her petals. Only in love her eyes start having a different depth, a different shine; her face starts having a joyful outlook. She has a deep transformation through love; she comes to maturity, of age.

So get rid of the conditioning that your mother unconsciously has given you. You have accepted it unconsciously. The way to get rid of it is to become conscious of it. It is a good beginning that you have asked. This is the beginning of consciousness—just the very ABC. You have to go far to change your mind completely, to be fresh, unconditioned, open and vulnerable.

And because of this conditioning you have been playing this ugly game, that whenever a man comes to you with his love, you run away, which naturally encourages him to chase you. That you enjoy, that he is chasing you. Every woman enjoys that. It is ugly, and you are not aware of its deeper implications. It means you are the prey; the man is the hunter and he is chasing game. You are allowing supremacy to the man, unknowingly. It has been traditionally given to you that the initiative in love should be taken by men, not by women; it is against a woman’s grace. Those are all rotten ideas—why be number two from the very beginning? If you love a man, why wait? I know many women who have waited for years because they wanted the man to take the initiative. But they have fallen in love with such men who were not going to take the initiative.

I know one woman in Bombay who was in love with J. Krishnamurti. Her whole life she remained unmarried, waiting for J. Krishnamurti to take the initiative. She is one of the most beautiful women but J. Krishnamurti is utterly fulfilled within himself, he does not need anybody else to complete him.

Obviously, he never took any initiative. And the woman, out of the conditioning of thousands of years, of course could not take the initiative; that is against feminine grace, that is “primitive.”

There is really no reason for the woman to wait for the man to take the initiative. If a woman feels love for someone, she should take the initiative and she should not feel humiliated if the man is not willing. This will give them equality. These are small things that will make the liberation of women possible.

But the woman has been always trying