Here is the repaired text:

that you are an exp hippie.
Where have all the hippies disappeared to? First you see them with a great force, then they become just like spent cartridges, impotent, defeated, depressed, trying to make something out of life, feeling that all those years of hippiedom were a waste. Others have gone far ahead: somebody has become the president, somebody has become the governor, and people start thinking, "We were stupid; we were just playing the guitar and the whole world passed us by." They repent. It is really difficult to find an old hippie.
So if you are a parent you will need this much courage not to interfere. Open doors to unknown directions to the child so he can explore. He does not know what he has in him, nobody knows. He has to grope in the dark. Don't make him afraid of darkness, don't make him afraid of failure, don't make him afraid of the unknown. Give him support. When he is going on an unknown journey, send him with all your support, with all your love, with all your blessings. Don't let him be affected by your fears. You may have fears, but keep them to yourself. Don't unload those fears on the child because that will be interfering.
After seven years, the next cycle of seven years, from seven to fourteen, is a new addition to life. The child begins to experience the first stirring of sexual energies. But this is only a kind of rehearsal.
To be a parent is a difficult job, so unless you are ready to take that difficult job, don't become a parent. People simply go on becoming fathers and mothers not knowing what they are doing. You are bringing a new life into existence; all the care in the world will be needed.
Now when the child starts playing out his sexual rehearsals, that is the time when parents interfere the most, because they have been interfered with. All that they know is what has been done to them, so they simply go on doing that to their children. Societies don't allow sexual rehearsals, or at least haven't allowed it up to now, and that too only in very advanced countries. Now boys and girls are at least educated in the same schools. But in a country like India, even today in most places coeducation starts only at the university level. The seven-year-old boy and the seven-year-old girl cannot be in the same boarding school. And this is the time for them—without any risk, without the girl getting pregnant, without any problems arising for their families—this is the time when they should be allowed all playfulness. Yes, it will have a sexual color to it, but it is rehearsal; it is not the real drama. And if you don't allow them even the rehearsal and then suddenly one day the curtain opens, and the real drama starts! The actors don't know what is going on; not even a prompter is there to tell them what to do. You have messed up their lives completely.
Those seven years in the second cycle in life are significant as a time for rehearsal. Children will meet, mix, play, become acquainted. And that will help humanity to drop almost 90 percent of its perversions. If children from seven to fourteen are allowed to be together, to swim together, to be naked before each other, 90 percent of perversions and 90 percent of pornography will simply disappear. Who will bother about it? When a boy has known so many girls naked, what interest can a magazine like Playboy have for him? When a girl has seen so many boys naked, I don't see that there is any possibility of curiosity about the other; it will simply disappear. They will grow together naturally, not as two different species of animals.
Right now that's how they grow, as if they are two different species of animals. They don't belong to one humanity; they are kept separate. A thousand and one barriers are created between them so they cannot have any rehearsal for their sexual life which is going to come. Because this rehearsal is missing, that's why in people's actual sex life foreplay is missing. And foreplay is so important—far more important than actual sexual contact, because actual sexual contact lasts only for a few moments. It is not nourishment; it simply leaves you in a limbo. You were hoping for so much, and nothing comes out of it.
In Hindi we have a proverb:
Kheela pahad nikli chuhia.
"You dug out the whole mountain and you found one rat." After all the effort—going to the movies and going to the disco, going to the restaurant and talking all kinds on nonsense which neither you nor the other wants to do, but both are talking—digging the mountain, and in the end, just a rat! Nothing is so frustrating as sex.
Just the other day somebody brought me an advertisement for a new car, and in the advertisement they had a beautiful sentence that I liked. The sentence was:
"It is better than sex." I don't care about the car, but the advertisement was beautiful! Certainly if you look around you, you will find a thousand and one things better than sex. Sex is just a rat, and that after so much huffing and puffing, so much perspiration, in the end both feel cheated. The reason is that you don't know the art of sex; you know only the middle point. It is as if you see a film just in the middle for a few seconds. Naturally you can't make any sense of it; the beginning is missing and the end is missing. Perhaps you simply saw an interval where there was nothing going on.
The man feels ashamed after sex; he turns over and goes to sleep. He simply cannot face the woman. He feels ashamed, that's why he turns to his side and goes to sleep. The woman weeps and cries because this was not what she was hoping for. This is all? Then what is this whole drama all about? But the reason is because the rehearsal part of your life has been canceled by your society. You don't know what foreplay is.
Foreplay is really the most satisfying part in sex. Foreplay is more loving. Sex is simply a biological climax, but the climax of what? You have missed everything that could have made it a climax. Do you think you suddenly reach the climax, missing all the rungs of the ladder? You have to move up the ladder, rung by rung, only then can you reach the climax. Everybody heads straight for the climax.
But most people's sexual life is nothing but a kind of relief. Yes, for a moment you feel relieved of a burden, just like a good sneeze. How good it feels afterwards! But for how long? How long can you feel good after a sneeze? How many seconds, how many minutes can you brag that "I had such a sneeze, it was great." As the sneeze is gone, with it goes all the joy too. It was simply something bothering you. You are finished with that botheration, now there is a little relaxation. That's the sexual life of most of the people in the world. Some energy was bothering you, was making you heavy; it was turning into a headache. Sex gives you relief.
But the way children are brought up is almost butchering their whole life. Those seven years of sexual rehearsal are absolutely essential. Girls and boys should be together in schools, in hostels, in swimming pools and beds. They should rehearse for the life that is going to come; they have to get ready for it.
And there is no danger, there is no problem if a child is given total freedom to explore his growing sexual energy and is not condemned, repressed. But that is what is being done. It is a very strange world in which you are living. You are born of sex, you will live for sex, your children will be born out of sex—and sex is the most condemned thing, the greatest sin. And all your religions go on putting this crap in your mind.
People all around the world are full of everything rotten that you can conceive, for the simple reason that they have not been allowed to grow in the natural way. They have not been allowed to accept themselves. They all have become ghosts. They are not authentically real people, they are only shadows of someone they could have been.
The second