, you will undo it; because all doing is mundane. Very few people come to know the secret of non-doing and allowing things to happen. If you want great things—things that are beyond the small reach of human hands, human mind, human abilities—then you will have to learn the art of non-doing. I call it meditation.

It is a trouble, because the moment you give a name to it, immediately people start asking how to "do" it. And you cannot say that they are wrong, because the very word "meditation" creates the idea of doing. They have their doctorate, they have done a thousand and one things; when they hear the word "meditation" they ask, "So just tell us how to do it?" Meditation basically means the beginning of non-doing, relaxing, going with the tide—just being a leaf in the breeze, or a cloud moving with the winds.

Never ask a cloud, "Where are you going?" He himself does not know; he has no address, he has no destiny. If the winds change he was going to the south, he starts moving towards the north. The cloud does not say to the winds, "This is absolutely illogical. We were moving south, now we are moving north. What is the point of it all?" No, he simply starts moving north as easily as he was moving south. To him, south, north, east, west, don't make any difference. Just to move with the wind, with no desire, with no goal, nowhere to reach; he is just enjoying the journey. Meditation makes you a cloud—of consciousness. Then windows will start opening in you, windows that will connect you with the universal, the immortal.

It feels to me that much of my own "doing" is to avoid boredom. Can you talk about the nature of the experiences we call boredom and restlessness? Boredom and restlessness are deeply related. Whenever you feel bored, then you feel restlessness. Restlessness is a by-product of boredom. Try to understand the mechanism. Whenever you feel bored you want to move away from that situation. If someone is saying something and you are getting bored, you start becoming fidgety. Of course, out of politeness you suppress it, but the body is already on the move because the body is more authentic than the mind, the body is more honest and sincere than the mind. The mind is trying to be polite, smiling. You say, "How interesting!" but inside you are saying, "How boring! I have listened to enough."