Once you understand one day that it was good that existence did not bother about you and just went on doing whatever it wanted to do, not according to your desire. It may take a little time for you to understand. You want this friend to be your friend forever, but tomorrow he turns into an enemy. Or simply, “You get lost!” and he is no longer with you. Somebody else fills the gap who is a far superior being. Then suddenly you realize that it was good that the other one got lost; otherwise, you would have been stuck with him. But still, the lesson never goes so deep that you stop asking for permanence. You will start asking for permanence with this man, with this woman: now, this should not change. You have not really learned the lesson that change is simply the very fabric of life. You have to understand it and go with it. Don’t create illusions; they are not going to help. And everybody is creating illusions of different kinds. I used to know one man who said, “I trust only money, nothing else.” I said, “You are making a very significant statement.” He said, “Everybody changes. You cannot rely on anybody. And as you get older, only your money is yours. Nobody cares, not even your son, not even your wife. If you have money they all care, they all respect you because you have money. If you don’t have money you become a beggar.” His saying that the only thing in the world to trust is money comes out of a long experience of life, of getting cheated again and again by the people he trusted. And he thought they loved him but they were all around him for the money. “But,” I told him, “at the moment of death money is not going to be with you. You can have evidence for his existence except your desire that he should be there. But your desire is not a proof of anything. God is only a desire of the childish mind. Man has come of age, and God has become meaningless. The hypothesis has lost its grip.” What I am trying to say is that every effort that has been directed toward avoiding loneliness has failed, and will fail, because it is against the fundamentals of life. What is needed is not something in which you can forget your loneliness. What is needed is that you become aware of your aloneness, which is a reality. And it is so full; it is not empty, it is so full and so complete and so overflowing with all the juices of life, with all the beauties and benedictions of existence that once you have tasted aloneness, the pain in the heart will disappear. Instead, a new rhythm of tremendous sweetness, peace, joy, bliss, will be there. It does not mean that a person who is centered in his aloneness, complete in himself, cannot make friends. In fact, only that person can make friends, because now it is no longer a need, it is just sharing. And when you share, there is no question of clinging. You flow with existence, you flow with life’s change, because it does not matter with whom you share. It can be the same person tomorrow—the same person for your whole life—or it can be different persons. It is not a contract, it is not a marriage; it is simply out of your fullness that you want to give. So whoever happens to be near you, you give. And giving makes you more centered, more integrated, more proud—but not more egoistic, simply proud that existence has been compassionate to you. Fear disappears, darkness disappears, the pain disappears, the desire for the other disappears. You can love a person, and if the person loves somebody else there will not be any jealousy, because you loved out of so much joy. It was not a clinging, you were not holding the other person in prison.