To be "game," she attracts the man, trying in every way to attract him by her beauty, by her clothes, her perfume, her hairdo—all that she can manage. She attracts the man, and once the man is attracted, then she starts running away. But she does not run too fast either. She goes on looking back, to see whether that fellow is coming or not. If he is left far behind, she waits. When he comes close again, she starts running.

This is stupid; love should be a clean affair. You love someone, you express your love and tell the other person, "You are not obliged to say yes; your no will be perfectly respected. It is just my desire. You need not unwillingly say yes to me, because that yes is dangerous unless you also feel love for me. Only then can our life become a completion."

A woman and a man in love can move into meditation very easily. Meditation and love are such close phenomena that if you move into meditation, your love energies start overflowing. If you really fall in love with someone who loves you, your meditative energies start growing; they are very deeply joined experiences. Hence I am in favor of both.

I have heard you speak about the ego and how, with awareness, one can see that it does not exist. But I realize that I never put much emphasis on awareness. Can you please show the way to become more aware?

Love is enough unto itself, if your love is not the ordinary, biological instinctive love. If it is not part of your ego, if it is not a power trip to dominate someone—if your love is just a pure joy, rejoicing in the being of the other for no reason at all, a sheer joy—awareness will follow this pure love just like a shadow. You need not worry about awareness.

There are only two ways: either you become aware, then love follows as a shadow; or you become so loving that awareness comes of its own accord. They are two sides of the same coin. You need not bother about the other side; just keep hold of one side and the other side cannot escape! The other side is bound to come.

And the path of love is easier, rosier, innocent, simple.

The path of awareness is a little arduous. Those who cannot love, for them I suggest the path of awareness. There are people who cannot love—their hearts have become stones. Their upbringing, their culture, their society has killed the very capacity to love because this whole world is not run by love, it is run by cunningness. To succeed in this world you don’t need love, you need a hard heart and a sharp mind. In fact, you don’t need the heart at all.

In this world, the people of the heart are crushed, exploited, oppressed. This world is run by the cunning, by the clever, by the heartless, and the cruel. So the whole society is managed in such a way that every child starts losing his heart, and his energy starts moving directly towards the head. The heart is ignored.

I have heard an ancient parable from Tibet, that in the beginning of time the heart used to be exactly in the middle part of the body. But because of continuously being pushed aside, out of the way, now it is no longer in the middle of the body. Now the poor fellow waits by the side of the road—“If someday you need me, I am here”—but it gets no nourishment, no encouragement. Instead it gets all kinds of condemnation.

If you do something and you say, "I did it because I felt like doing it," everybody is going to laugh: "Felt? Have you lost your head? Give your reason, your logic for doing it. Feeling is not a reason to do anything."

Even if you fall in love, you have to find reasons why you have fallen in love: because the woman’s nose is beautiful, her eyes have such depth, her body is so proportionate. These are not the reasons. You have never added up all these reasons on your calculator and then found that this woman seems to be worthy of falling in love with: "Fall in love with this woman—exactly the right length of nose, the right kind of hair, the right color, the right proportion of the body. What more do you want?"

But this is not the way that anybody ever falls in love. You fall in love. Then just to satisfy the idiots around you that you are not a fool, you have calculated everything and only then you have taken the step. It is a reasonable, rational, logical step.

Nobody hears the heart.
And the mind is so chattering, so continuously chattering—yakkety-yak, yakkety-yak—that even if the heart sometimes says something, it never reaches to you. It cannot reach. The bazaar in your head is buzzing so much that it is impossible, absolutely impossible for the heart. Slowly, the heart stops saying anything. Not heard again and again, ignored again and again, it falls silent.

The head runs the show in society; otherwise, we would have lived in a totally different world—more loving, less hate, less war, no possibility of nuclear weapons. The heart will never give support for any destructive technology to be developed. The heart will never be in the service of death. It is life: it throbs for life, it beats for life.

Because of the whole conditioning of society, the method of awareness has to be chosen, because awareness appears to be very logical and rational. But if you can love, then there is no need to go on a long, arduous route unnecessarily. Love is the shortest way, the most natural—so easy that it is possible even for a small child. It needs no training. You are born with it.

I have heard a story: In the life of one of the great emperors of India, Akbar, there is a small story. He was very much interested in all kinds of talented people, and from all over India he had collected nine people, the most talented geniuses, who were known as the "nine jewels of Akbar’s court."

One day, just gossiping with his vice-councillors, he said, "Last night I was discussing with my wife. She is very insistent that every husband is henpecked. I tried hard, but she says, 'I know many families, but I have never found any husband who is not henpecked.' What do you think?" he asked the councillors.

One of the councillors, Birbal, said, "Perhaps she is right, because you could not prove it. You yourself are a henpecked husband; otherwise, you could have given her a good beating, then and there proving that you are the husband and you are in charge."

Akbar said, "That I cannot do, because I have to live with her. It is easy to advise somebody else to beat his wife. Can you beat your wife?"

Birbal said, "No, I cannot. I simply accept that I am a henpecked husband, and your wife is right."

But Akbar said, "It has to be proved, one way or another. Surely in the capital there must be at least one husband who is not henpecked. There is no rule in the world that has no exception, and this is not a scientific rule at all." He said to Birbal, "You take my two beautiful Arabian horses—one was black, one was white—and go around the capital. If you can find a man who is not henpecked, you can give him the choice: whichever horse he wants is a present from