The human being is an imitator. They are constantly repeating the patterns of their parents, even if they do not realize it. The first step to break free from this cycle is to get rid of your parents, not physically, but by getting rid of the parental voices inside you. You must efface them and become free for the first time.

Every person feels resentful towards their parents because of the harm they have done. However, it is essential to understand that they wished all good for you and wanted everything for your well-being. But what can they do? Just by wanting something or having good wishes, nothing happens. They were well-wishers, but they are robots who create an atmosphere in which their children will eventually become like them.

To break the cycle of imitation, you must get rid of your parents. This requires careful observation and behavioral changes. Watch when your mother is there functioning through you and stop that. Do something absolutely new that your mother could not even have imagined.

People think they can only love when they find a worthy partner or someone who is perfect. But this idea has been put into their minds, making them unhappy because they keep looking for the perfect man or woman without ever finding it. To flow and grow in love needs no perfection. Love has nothing to do with the other person being perfect. A loving person simply loves, just like an alive person breathes and drinks.

The second thing to remember is not to ask for perfection; otherwise, you will not find any love flowing in you. You must be open to imperfections and understand that people who demand perfection are very unloving and neurotic. Once a man loves a woman or a woman loves a man, demands immediately enter. The woman starts demanding that the man should be perfect, just because he loves her. As if he has committed a sin! Now he has to become perfect or drop all his limitations—suddenly, just because of this woman?

Naturally, becoming superhuman is very difficult, so people become cheats. They start pretending and acting and playing games in the name of love. Therefore, remember never to demand perfection in order to find true love