The following text contains font-encoding or glyph artifacts. Repair it into clean, readable English. Do not summarize or omit content.

TEXT:
mistakes,	and	you	have	to	learn.	To	be
together	is	a	great	learning:	of	forgiving,	forgetting,	understanding	that	the	other
is	as	human	as	you	are.	Just	a	little	forgiveness.
There	is	an	old	proverb:	“To	err	is	human	and	to	forgive	is	divine.”	I	don’t
agree.	To	err	is	human	and	to	forgive	is	also	human.	To	forgive	is	divine?—then
you	are	raising	it	too	high,	beyond	human	reach.	Bring	it	within	human	reach
and	learn	to	forgive.	Learn	to	enjoy	forgiveness,	learn	to	offer	an	apology;	you
don’t	lose	anything	when	you	can	say	to	your	partner,	“I’m	sorry,	I	was	wrong.”
But	nobody	wants	to	say,	“I	was	wrong.”	You	want	to	be	always	right.	The
man	tries	to	prove	through	arguments	that	he	is	right,	and	the	woman	tries
through	emotions	to	prove	that	she	is	right.	This	is	a	very	difficult	situation
for	both.
If	you	are	just	friendly	and	don’t	make	your	friendliness	a	legal	affair	of
husband	and	wife,	things	will	be	far	better	because	then	you	are	not	a	burden	to
anybody,	not	a	bondage.	There	will	be	no	question	of	having	to	fit	with	each
other.	You	can	have	your	individuality	totally	free	from	each	other,	and	yet	be	in
love.
And	 really	 to	 be	 totally	 different	 in	 your	 individuality	 creates	 the	 best
possibility	of	love.
Whenever	I	am	in	love	with	a	man,	for	that	time	no	other	man
attracts	me.	But	for	the	man,	it’s	not	the	same.	Though	he	is	happy
and	satisfied,	and	wants	to	keep	the	relationship	with	me,	he	has	his
short	 love	 affairs	 every	 few	 months.	 I	 understand	 the	 different
nature	of	man	and	woman.	I	also	understand	every	love	relationship
has	its	peaks	and	valleys.	Still,	sadness	in	me	keeps	on	coming.	I	give
a	long	rope	to	the	man.	My	friends	say	I	make	myself	so	available
that	I	let	the	man	take	me	for	granted	and	I	lose	my	self-respect.	I’m
not	clear.	I	don’t	expect	anything	from	him.	Would	you	please	like	to
comment?