Freedom, and he can enjoy freedom. And in the right moment, when you start missing each other, he's back. Just wait! And he's not a dangerous person; he cannot harm you. He's very good at heart, just a little loose in his head. But to have a boyfriend who is a little loose in the head is better than having a boyfriend who is a little tight in the head. I know it's no ordinary relationship: you both are extraordinary. SOUL MATES OR CELL MATES?

We are all living lives according to fictions, poetries, film stories. That has given humanity a wrong impression, the impression that when there is love everything will fit, that there will be no conflict. For centuries poets have been giving the idea that lovers are made for each other. Nobody is made for anybody else. Everybody is different from everybody else. You may love a person without knowing that you love the person only because there is so much difference between you, so much distance. The distance is a challenge, the distance is an adventure; the distance makes the woman or the man worth getting hold of. But things as they appear from a distance are not the same when they come close.

When you are just courting a man or a woman, everything is beautiful, everything fits because both want everything to fit. Anything that does not fit is not allowed to surface; it is repressed in the unconscious. So lovers sitting on the beach looking at the moon do not know each other at all. The marriage is almost finished before the honeymoon is finished.

In the East where the tradition of arranged marriage is still followed, there is nothing like a honeymoon; they don't give the chance for the marriage to be finished so soon. Couples go on living together and never feel that things are not fitting, that something is missing. There is no chance at all for that to happen. Husbands and wives do not choose for themselves; marriages are organized by the parents, by the astrologers, by all kinds of people except the two who are going to be married.

Even after they get married, the couple cannot see each other alone in the daylight, they can only meet each other deep in the darkness of the night. They have their own ideas, you have your own ideas; she respects your ideas, you respect her ideas; she has her way, you have your own way and nobody is trying to impose on and indoctrinate the other. Then there is no question of fight. And then there is no question that things are not fitting. Why should they be fitting?

Why should there be any feeling that something is missing? Nothing is missing; it is just that your idea of harmony is not there. Harmony is not something very great, it is boring. Once in a while, even if you fight, even if you get really hot, that does not mean love disappears; that simply means love is capable of absorbing even disagreements, fights, overcoming all these hindrances. But the old ideology gets in the way of your understanding.

I am reminded of the old biblical story which is not told very much because it is very dangerous. First, God made one man and one woman. But as you know by looking at the world, God does not seem to be very intelligent. Here, nothing is fitting; from the very beginning you can see it. He made man and woman, two persons, and gave them a small bed, not a double bed.

The very first night was the night of a tremendous fight because the woman wanted to sleep on the bed. The man thought that he should sleep on the bed and she should sleep on the floor. The whole night they went on fighting, hitting each other, throwing things, and in the morning the man said to God, "I asked you to give me a companion but I did not ask you to give me an enemy." If this is your idea of a companion, then I want to tell you I was better off alone. I don't want this woman; there is never going to be peace between us."

Now the simple thing would have been to ask for a double bed. I don't understand what kind of God that was, and what these idiots were asking. The simple solution was a double bed, or two single beds if things were getting that bad. But instead of that Adam said, "I don't want this woman; she is trying to be equal to me." The male chauvinist idea arose that very night.

So God dismantled the woman—naturally, because God is also a male chauvinist. Her name was Lilith. He dismantled her just the way you dismantle any mechanism. He destroyed the woman and said, "Now I will make another woman who will be lower than you and will never ask for equality." Then he made the second woman, who was Eve, by taking one of the ribs from Adam.

It is said that every night when Adam would come back home and go to sleep, Eve would count his ribs because she was always afraid that if he lost another rib, that would mean another woman was also somewhere around.

There is no need for more than friendship. Love has to be a friendly affair in which nobody is superior, in which nobody is going to decide about things, in which both are fully aware that they are different, that their approach towards life is different, that they think differently, and still, with all these differences, they love each other. Then you will not find any problems. Problems are created by us.

Don't try to create something superhuman. Be human, accept the other person's humanity with all the frailty humanity is prone to. Your partner will commit mistakes just as you commit mistakes