us you will be able to see that each moment is new. But for that, much energy, a tremendous energy of consciousness is needed. The wife is not the same, remember. You are in an illusion. Go back home and look again at your wife—she is not the same. Nobody can be the same; just appearances deceive. The trees are not the same as they were yesterday. How can they be? They have grown. Many leaves have fallen, new leaves have come. Look at the tree on your street—how many new leaves have come? Every day the old are falling and the new are coming. But you are not that conscious. Either have no consciousness, then you cannot feel the repetition, or, have so much consciousness that in each repetition you can see something new. These are the two ways to get out of boredom. Changing outside things is not going to help. It is just like rearranging the furniture in your room again and again. Whatever you do, you can put it this way or that way, it is the same furniture. There are many people who continuously think about how to manage things, where to put things, how to arrange them, where not to put them, and they go on changing things according to their ideas. But it is the same room, it is the same furniture. How long will you be able to deceive yourself in this way? By and by everything settles, the newness disappears. You don't have a quality of consciousness that can go on finding the new again and again. We always live with dead expectations. Every day we come home and we expect certain behavior from our partner. Now look how we create our own misery: we expect a certain fixed behavior from our partner, and then we want our partner to be new? We are asking the impossible! If you really want your wife, your husband, your partner to remain continuously new to you, don't expect. Come home always ready to be surprised and shocked, then the other will be new. But instead, we expect the other to behave in a certain way, and of course, each of them manages the roles. We are not living life, we are living roles. The husband comes home, he forces himself into a certain role. By the time he enters the house, he is no longer an alive person, he is just a husband. A husband means a certain type of expected behavior. At home, the woman is a wife and the man is a husband. Now when these two persons meet, there are really four persons: the husband and wife, who are not real persons but just personas, masks, false patterns, expected behavior, duties, and all that, and the real persons hiding behind the masks. Those real persons feel bored. But you have invested much in your persona, in your mask. If you really want a life that has no boredom in it, drop all masks, be true. Sometimes it will be difficult, I know, but it is worth it. Be true. If you feel like loving your wife, love her; otherwise say you don't feel like it. What is happening right now is that the husband goes on making love to the wife, thinking of some actress. In his imagination he is not making love to this woman, he is making love to some other woman. And the same is true about the wife. Then things become boring because they are no longer alive. The intensity, the sharpness, is lost. It happened on a railway platform. Mr. Johnson had weighed himself on one of those old-fashioned penny machines that delivers a card with a fortune printed on it. The formidable Mrs. Johnson plucked it from her husband's fingers and said, "Let me see that." Oh, it says you are firm and resolute, have a decisive personality, are a leader of men, and are attractive to women." Then she turned over the card, studied it for a moment, and said, "And they have got the weight wrong as well." And no woman can tolerate it if her husband is attracted to other women. There is the whole point, the whole crux. If he is not attracted to other women, how can she expect that he will be attracted to her? If he is attracted to other women, only then can he be attracted to her, because she is also a woman. The wife wants him to look at any other woman with a loving eye." Of course you manage to control yourself, because if you don't it creates chaos. Love has to be a way of life. You are to be loving. Only then can you love your wife or your husband. But the wife says, "No, you should not look at anybody else with a loving eye." And of course we manage to control ourselves, because if we don't it creates chaos. We want our partner to fulfill certain expectations. And we are the ones who manage the roles.