Here is the repaired text:

me.”
They were valuable. In those days horses were very valuable, and these were the most beautiful horses.

Birbal said, "It is useless, but if you say so I will go."

He went, and everybody was found to be henpecked. It was so easy to see!

Birbal would just call the person and his wife to their front door and ask the husband, "Are you henpecked or not?"

The man would look at his wife and say, "You should have asked when I was alone. This is not right, it will create unnecessary trouble. Just for a horse I am not going to destroy my life. You take your horses, I don’t want either one of them."

But then he came upon one man who was sitting in front of his house, with two persons massaging him. He was a champion wrestler, a very strong man.

Birbal thought, "Perhaps this man—he could kill anybody, even without any weapons. If he just got hold of your neck you would be finished!" Birbal said, "Can I ask you a question?"

The man stood up and said, "Question? What question?"

Birbal asked him, "Are you henpecked?"

That man said, "First, let us greet each other, a handshake." He crushed Birbal’s hand and said, "I will not let go of your hand until tears start coming from your eyes! You dare to ask me such a question?"

Birbal was nearly dying—he himself was almost a man of steel, but tears started coming, and he said, "Just let go of me! You are not henpecked! Clearly I have just come to the wrong place to ask such a thing. But where is your wife?"

The man pointed and said, "Look, she is there, cooking my breakfast." A very small woman was cooking his breakfast.

The woman was so small and the man was so big that Birbal thought there really was a possibility that perhaps this man was not henpecked. He could kill this woman! So he said, "Now there is no need to go any further into investigation. You can choose either horse from these two, black and white, as a reward from the king for the man who is not henpecked."

And just at that moment, that small woman said, "Don’t choose the black! Choose the white, or I will make your life a hell!"

The man said, "No, no, I was anyway going to choose the white. You just keep quiet."

And Birbal said, "You get neither white nor black. It is all finished, you lost the game. Even you are a henpecked husband."

There is a continuous fight for domination. Love cannot blossom in such an atmosphere. The man is fighting in the world for all kinds of ambitions. The woman is fighting the man because she is afraid: he is out of the house the whole day. "Who knows? He may be having affairs with other women." She is jealous, suspicious; she wants to be sure that this man remains controlled. So in the house the man is fighting with the wife, in the outside he is fighting with the world. Where do you think the flower of love can blossom?

The flower of love can blossom only when there is no ego, when there is no effort to dominate, when one is humble, when one is trying not to be somebody but is ready to be nobody. Then awareness will come of its own accord, and this is the most beautiful way, the most innocent way: a path full of flowers, a path that passes through beautiful lakes, rivers, groves, greenery.

If you can easily be heartful, forget all about awareness; it will come of its own accord. Each step of love will bring its own awareness. This love will not be falling in love; I call it rising in love.

How is it possible for a woman to be in love and still centered in herself and in her own individuality?

The question has many implications.
First, you do not understand what being centered means. Second, you also have no experience of the phenomenon of love. I can say this with absolute authority, because your question supplies all the evidence for what I am saying.

Love and centering are one phenomenon, they are not two. If you have known love, you cannot be anything but centered.
Love means coming to be at ease with existence. It may be through a lover, it may be through a friend, or it may be simply direct and immediate—through the sunrise, the sunset. The very experience of love will make you centered. This has been the whole philosophy of devotees down through the ages. Love is their science; centering is the result.

But there are people—and there are only two kinds of people—who have a dominant reasoning, logic. Their heart is undeveloped. And there are people whose heart is blossoming and now reason, rationality only function as servants to the heart.
Man’s misery is that he is trying to do the impossible: he is trying to force the heart to serve the mind, which is impossible. This is your chaos, this is your mess.

The question has arisen out of the ordinary experience called love. It is not love, it is only called love—just a glimpse, just a small taste, which is not going to be a nourishment. On the contrary, it is going to become a pathological state because one moment you are high and everything is just far out, and the next moment all is dark, you cannot believe that there has been anything significant in your life. All those moments of love appear to have happened in dreams, or perhaps you have imagined them.
And these dark moments are absolutely joined with the beautiful moments.

This is the dialectic of human mind. It functions through opposites. You will love a man and you will love the man for absolutely wrong reasons. You will love the man or the woman because you are carrying within you an image of the other. The boy has got it from the mother and the girl has got it from the father.
In the analysis they are all searching for the womb and its beautiful, relaxed state.

Psychologically, the eternal quest for moksha,
ultimate liberation,
enlightenment, can be reduced to the basic psychological fact that man has already known the most beautiful, the most peaceful state before he was born.
Now, if something greater does not happen in his life, some exposure to the divine, to the universal, he is going to remain miserable because—unconsciously—he will always be judging.

He knows he has lived for nine months and, remember, for a child in the mother’s womb, nine months are almost eternity because he does not know how to count, he does not have any clock. Each moment is enough unto itself. He does not know there is going to be another moment afterwards, so each moment is a surprise.
And with no worry, with no tension about food, about clothes, about shelter, he is absolutely at ease, relaxed, centered. There is nothing to distract him from the center.

There is nobody there even to say hello.
This experience of nine months of being centered, of immense joy, peace, aloneness…The other is no more there; you are the world, you are the whole. Nothing is missing, everything is supplied by nature without any effort on your part.
But life confronts you in a totally different way—antagonistically,
competitively. Everybody is your enemy, because everybody is in the same market;
everybody is your enemy because everybody has the same desires, the same ambition. You are bound to come into conflict with millions of people.

It is because of this inner antagonism that all the cultures of the world have created a certain system of etiquette, familiarity, formality, and they have emphasized it continuously to the child: "You have to respect your father." All the cultures all over the world throughout the whole of history, why are they all insisting to the child: "You should respect your father"? There is some suspicion that if he is left alone, the child is not going to respect the father; that much is certain, simple logic. In fact, the child is going to hate. Every girl hates her mother.

To hide it—because it will be very difficult to live in a society where all your wounds are uncovered and everybody is walking around with uncovered wounds—a certain ethos, a morality, a certain style of life has to co