cycle of seven years in life is significant as a time for rehearsal. Children will meet, mix, play, and become acquainted. This will help humanity to drop almost 90 percent of its perversions. If children from seven to fourteen are allowed to be together, to swim together, and to be naked before each other, 90 percent of perversions and 90 percent of pornography will simply disappear. Who will bother about it? When a boy has known so many girls naked, what interest can a magazine like Playboy have for him? When a girl has seen so many boys naked, I don't see that there is any possibility of curiosity about the other; it will simply disappear. They will grow together naturally, not as two different species of animals.
Right now that's how they grow, as if they are two different species of animals. They don't belong to one humankind; they are kept separate. A thousand and one barriers are created between them so they cannot have any rehearsal for their sexual life which is going to come. Because this rehearsal part of your life has been canceled by your society, you don't know what foreplay is.
Foreplay is really the most satisfying part in sex. Foreplay is more loving. Sex is simply a biological climax, but the climax of what? You have missed everything that could have made it a climax. Do you think you suddenly reach the climax, missing all the rungs of the ladder? Everybody heads straight for the climax.
But most people's sexual life is nothing but a kind of relief. Yes, for a moment you feel relieved of a burden, just like a good sneeze. How good it feels afterwards! But for how long? How many seconds, how many minutes can you brag that "I had such a sneeze, it was great." As the sneeze is gone, with it goes all the joy, too. It was simply something bothering you. You are finished with that botheration, now there is a little relaxation. That's the sexual life of most of the people in the world. Some energy was bothering you, was making you heavy; it was turning into a headache. Sex gives you relief.
But the way children are brought up is almost butchering their whole life. Those seven years of sexual rehearsal are absolutely essential. Girls and boys should be together in schools, in hostels, in swimming pools and beds. They should rehearse for the life that is going to come; they have to get ready for it. And there is no danger, there is no problem if a child is given total freedom to explore his growing sexual energy and is not condemned, repressed. But that is what is being done. It is a very strange world in which you are living. You are born of sex, you will live for sex, your children will be born out of sex—and sex is the most condemned thing, the greatest sin. And all your religions go on putting this crap in your mind.
People all around the world are full of everything rotten that you can conceive, for the simple reason that they have not been allowed to grow in the natural way. They have not been allowed to accept themselves. They all have become ghosts. They are not authentically real people, they are only shadows of someone they could have been.