to be "game." She attracts the man, she tries in every way to attract him by her beauty, by her clothes, her perfume, her hairdo - all that she can manage. She attracts the man, and once the man is attracted, then she starts running away. But she does not run too fast either. She goes on looking back to see whether that fellow is coming or not. If he is left far behind, she waits. When he comes close again, she starts running.

This is stupid; love should be a clean affair. You love someone, you express your love and tell the other person, "You are not obliged to say yes; your no will be perfectly respected. It is just my desire. You need not unwillingly say yes to me, because that yes is dangerous unless you also feel love for me. Only then can our life become a completion."

A woman and a man in love can move into meditation very easily. Meditation and love are such close phenomena that if you move into meditation, your love energies start overflowing. If you really fall in love with someone who loves you, your meditative energies start growing; they are very deeply joined experiences. Hence I am in favor of both.

I have heard you speak about the ego and how, with awareness, one can see that it does not exist. But I realize that I never put much emphasis on awareness. Can you please show the way to become more aware?

Love is enough unto itself, if your love is not the ordinary, biological instinctive kind. It needs no training. You are born with the quality of it if it is not corrupted by others. But love should be pure. It should not be impure.

You will be surprised to know that the English word "love" comes from a very ugly root in Sanskrit. It comes from lobh. Lobh means "greed." And as far as ordinary love is concerned, it is a kind of greed. That's why there are people who love money, who love houses; there are people who love this, who love that. Even if they love a woman or a man, it is simply their greed; they want to possess everything beautiful. It is a power trip. Hence, you will find lovers continuously fighting, fighting about such trivia that they both feel ashamed "about what things we go on fighting!" But it is not a question of trivia; it is a question of who has power, who is more dominant, whose voice is heard.

Love cannot exist in such circumstances.