PERFECTION. You have no right to demand anything from anybody. If somebody loves you, be thankful, but don’t demand anything—because the other has no obligation to love you. If somebody loves, it is a miracle. Be thrilled by the miracle.

But people are not thrilled. For small things they will destroy all possibilities of love. They are not interested much in love and the joy of it. They are more interested in other ego trips.

Be concerned with your joy. Be utterly concerned with your joy, be only concerned with your joy. Everything else is non-essential. Love—as a natural function, just as you breathe. And when you love a person, don’t start demanding; otherwise from the very beginning you are closing the doors. Don’t expect anything. If something comes your way, feel grateful. If nothing comes, there is no need for it to come, there is no necessity for it to come. You cannot expect it.

But watch people, see how they take each other for granted. If your wife prepares food for you, you never thank her. I’m not saying that you have to verbalize your thanks, but it should be in your eyes. But you don’t bother, you take it for granted—that is her work. Who told you that?

If your husband goes and earns money, you never thank him. You don’t feel any gratitude. “That’s what a man should do.” That’s your mind. How can love grow? Love needs a climate of love, love needs a climate of gratitude, thankfulness. Love needs a non-demanding atmosphere, non-expecting atmosphere. This is the second thing to remember.

And the third thing is: Rather than thinking how to get love, start giving. If you give, you get. There is no other way. People are more interested in how to grab and get. Everybody is interested in getting and nobody seems to enjoy giving. People give very reluctantly—if ever they give, they give only to get, and they are almost businesslike. It is a bargain. They always go on watching to make sure they get more than they give—then it is a good bargain, good business. And the other is doing the same.

Love is not a business, so stop being businesslike. Otherwise you will miss your life and love and all that is beautiful in it—because all that is beautiful is not at all businesslike. Business is the ugliest thing in the world—a necessary evil, but existence knows nothing of business. Trees bloom; it is not a business; the stars shine; it is not a business, and you don’t have to pay for it and nobody demands anything from you. A bird comes and sits at your door and sings a song, and the bird will not ask you for a certificate or some sign of appreciation. He has sung the song and then happily he flies away, leaving no traces behind.

That’s how love grows. Give, and don’t wait to see how much you can grab. Yes, it comes, it comes a thousandfold, but it comes naturally. It comes on its own, there is no need to demand it. When you demand, it never comes. When you demand, you have killed it. So give. Start giving.

In the beginning it will be hard, because your whole life you have been trained not to give but to get. In the beginning you will have to fight with your own armor. Your musculature has become hard, your heart has become frozen, you have become cold. In the beginning it will be difficult, but each step will lead to a further step, and by and by the river starts flowing.

First get rid of your parents. In getting rid of your parents, you get rid of society, in getting rid of your parents, you get rid of civilization, education, everything—because your parents represent all that. You become an individual. For the first time you are no longer part of the mass; you have an authentic individuality. You are on your own. This is what growth is. This is what a grown-up person should be.

A grown-up person is one who needs no parents. A grown-up person is one who needs nobody to cling to or lean upon. A grown-up person is one who is happy in his aloneness—his aloneness is a song, a celebration. A grown-up person is one who can be with himself happily. His aloneness is not loneliness, his solitariness is solitude, it is meditative.

One day you had to come out of your mother’s womb. If you had remained there longer than nine months, you would have been dead—not only you, your mother would also have been dead. One day you had to come out of your mother’s womb; then one day you had to come out of your family atmosphere, another womb, to go to school. Then one day you had to come out of your school atmosphere, another womb, to go into the larger world. But deep down you are still a child. You are still in the womb! Layers upon layers of womb are there and that womb has to be broken.

This is what in the East we have called the second birth. When you have attained to a second birth, you are completely free of parental impressions. And the beauty is that only such a person feels grateful to the parents. The paradox is that only such a person can forgive his parents. He feels compassion and love for them, he feels tremendously for them because they have also suffered in the same way. He is not angry, no, not at all. He may have tears in his eyes but he is not angry, and he will do everything to help his parents to move toward such a plenitude of aloneness, such a height of aloneness.

Become individuals, that’s the first thing. The second thing is, don’t expect perfection and don’t ask and don’t demand. Love ordinary people. Nothing is wrong with ordinary people. Ordinary people are extraordinary! Each human being has to be seen as a unique individuality. Once this respect is shown, love will naturally grow.

PART I
The Journey from "Me" to "We"
Understanding the Nature and Nurture of Love

Love cannot be learned; it cannot be cultivated. The cultivated love will not be love at all. It will not be a real rose, it will be a plastic flower. When you learn something, it means something comes from outside; it is not an inner growth.

And love has to be your inner growth if it is to be authentic and real. Love is not a learning but a growth. What is needed on your part is not to learn the ways of love but to unlearn the ways of un-love. The hindrances have to be removed, the obstacles have to be destroyed—then love is your natural, spontaneous being. Once the obstacles are removed, the rocks thrown out of the way, the flow starts. It is already there—hidden behind many rocks, but the spring of love is already there. It is your very being.

BEYOND DEPENDENCY AND DOMINATION
Breaking Out of the Shell of the Ego

I have been always surprised by the number of people who come to me and say they are afraid of love. What is the fear of love? It is because when you really love somebody, your ego starts slipping away and melting. You cannot love with the ego; the ego becomes a barrier, and when you want to drop the barrier between yourself and the other, the ego says, "This is going to be a death. Beware!"

The death of the ego is not your death; the death of the ego is really your possibility of life. The ego is just a dead crust around you, it has to be broken and thrown away. It comes into being naturally—just as a traveler collects dust on his clothes, on his body, and he has to take a bath to get rid of the dust. As we move through time, the dust of our experiences, our knowledge, of the life we have lived, of the past, collects. That dust becomes the ego. It accumulates and becomes a crust around you, which has to be broken and thrown away. One has to take a bath every day, in fact every moment, so that this crust never becomes a prison.

It will be helpful to understand where the ego comes from,