shoulders is Himalayan.

All the people around you have been helped, greatly helped to be what they are. You have been helped; now you want to help the children, too? All that you can do is to be loving, nourishing. Be warm, be accepting. The child brings an unknown potential, and there is no way to figure out what he is going to be. So there is no possibility to suggest, "In this way you should help the child." Each child is unique, so there cannot be a general discipline for every child.

The right way is not to help the child at all. If you have real courage, please don’t help the child. Love him, nourish him. Let him do what he wants to do. Let him go where he wants to go. Your mind will be tempted again and again to interfere, and with good excuses. The mind is very clever in rationalizing: "If you don't interfere there may be danger; the child may fall into the well if you don't stop him." But I say to you, it is better to let him fall into the well than to help him and destroy him.

It is a very rare possibility that the child falls into the well—and then too, it does not mean death; he can be taken out. And if you are really so concerned, the well can be covered; but don’t help the child, and don’t interfere. The well can be fenced, but don’t interfere with the child. Your real concern should be to remove all dangers but don’t interfere with the child; let him go on his way.

You will have to understand some significant growth patterns. Life has seven-year cycles, it moves in seven-year cycles just as the earth makes one rotation on its axis in twenty-four hours. Now nobody knows why not twenty-five, why not twenty-three. There is no way to answer it; it is simply a fact. So don’t ask me why life moves in seven-year cycles. I don’t know. This much I know, that it moves in seven-year cycles, and if you understand those cycles you will understand a great deal about human growth.

The first seven years are the most important because the foundation of life is being laid. That’s why all the religions are very much concerned about grabbing children as quickly as possible. Those first seven years are the years when you are conditioned, stuffed with all kinds of ideas which will go on haunting you your whole life, which will go on distracting you from your potentiality, which will corrupt you, which will never allow you to see clearly. They will always come like clouds before your eyes and they will make everything confused.

Things are clear, very clear—existence is absolutely clear—but your eyes have gathered layers upon layers of dust. And all that dust has been arranged in the first seven years of your life when you were so innocent, so trusting, that whatsoever was told to you, you accepted as truth. And whatever has gone into your foundation, later on it will be very difficult for you to uncover: it has become almost part of your blood, bones, your very marrow. You will ask a thousand other questions but you will never ask about the basic foundations of your belief.

The first expression of love toward the child is to leave his first seven years absolutely innocent, unconditioned, to leave him for seven years completely wild, a pagan. He should not be converted to Hinduism, to Mohammedanism, to Christianity. Anybody who is trying to convert a child to some religion is not compassionate, he is cruel: he is contaminating the very soul of a new, fresh arrival. Before the child has even asked questions he has been answered with ready-made philosophies, dogmas, ideologies. This is a very strange situation.

The child has not asked about God, and you go on teaching him about God. Why so much impatience? Wait!

If the child someday shows interest in God and starts asking, then try to tell him not only your idea of God—because nobody has any monopoly. Put before him all the ideas of God that have been presented to different people by different ages, by different religions, cultures, civilizations. Put before him all the ideas about God, and tell him, "You can choose among these, whichever appeals to you. Or you can invent your own, if nothing suits you. If everything seems to be flawed, and you think you can come up with a better idea, then invent your own. Or if you find that there is no way to invent an idea without loopholes, then drop the whole thing; there is no need."

A person can live without God; there is no intrinsic necessity. Millions of people have lived without God, so God is nothing that is inevitably needed by anybody. You can tell the child, "Yes, I have my idea; and that too is in the combination of all sorts of ideas in this collection. You can choose that, but I am not saying that my idea is the right idea. It appeals to me; it may not appeal to you."

There is no inner necessity that the son should agree with the father, the daughter should agree with the mother. In fact, it seems far better that children should not agree with their parents. That’s how evolution happens. If every child agrees with the father then there will be no evolution, because each new father will agree with his own father, and everybody will be where God left Adam and Eve—naked, outside the gate of the Garden of Eden. Everybody will be stuck there.

Because sons and daughters have disagreed with their fathers and mothers, with their whole tradition, human beings have evolved. This whole evolution is a tremendous disagreement with the past. And the more intelligent you are, the more you are going to disagree. But parents appreciate the child who agrees and they condemn the child who disagrees.

Up to seven years, if a child can be left innocent, uncorrupted by the ideas of others, then to distract him from his potential growth becomes impossible. The child’s first seven years are the most vulnerable. And they are in the hands of parents, teachers, priests. How to save children from parents, priests, teachers is a question of such enormous importance that it seems almost impossible to find out how to do it. It is not a question of helping the child. It is a question of protecting the child. If you have a child, protect the child from yourself. Protect the child from others who can influence him: at least up to the age of seven years, protect him. The child is just like a small plant, weak, soft; just a strong wind can destroy it, any animal can eat it up. You can put a protective fencing around it but that is not imprisoning, you are simply protecting. When the plant is bigger, the fencing will be removed.

Protect the child from every kind of influence so that he can remain himself and it is only a question of seven years, because then the first cycle will be complete. By seven years he will be well grounded, centered, strong enough.

You don’t know how strong a seven-year-old child can be because you have not seen uncorrupted children; you have seen only corrupted children. They carry the fears, the cowardliness of their fathers, their mothers, their families. They are not their own selves.

If a child remains uncorrupted for seven years, you will be amazed when you meet such a child. He will be as sharp as a sword. His eyes will be clear, his insight will be clear. And you will see a tremendous strength in him which you cannot find even in a seventy-year-old adult, because the foundations are shaky in that adult.

With a weak foundation, as the building goes on becoming higher and higher, the foundation becomes more and more shaky. So you will see that the older a person becomes, the more afraid. When you are young, you may be an atheist; when you become old, you start believing in God. Why is that? When you were below thirty, you were a hippie. You had the courage to go against society, to behave in your own way: to have long hair, to have a beard, to roam around the world and take all kinds of risks. But by the time you are forty, all that has disappeared. You will be in some office in a suit, clean-shaven, well-groomed. Nobody will even be able to recognize