Notes from Underground
Fyodor Dostoevsky
T ranslated by Kyril Zinovieff and Jenny Hughes
ALMA CLASSICS
alma  classics
an imprint of
alma  books  ltd
3 Castle Y ard
Richmond
Surrey TW10 6TF
United Kingdom
www .almaclassics.com
Notes from Underground first published in Russian as 
Zapiski iz Podpol’ya in 1861
First published by Alma Classics in 2010, repr. 2011
This new edition first published by Alma Classics in 2014.  
Repr. 2015, 2017, 2019, 2020
English translation, introduction and translators’ note © Kyril Zinovieff and 
Jenny Hughes, 2010
Extra material © Ignat Avsey
Cover Image: nathanburtondesign.com
Printed in Great Britain by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon CR0 4YY
isbn : 978-1-84749-374-3
All the pictures in this volume are reprinted with permission or presumed to be 
in the public domain. Every effort has been made to ascertain and acknowledge 
their copyright status, but should there have been any unwitting oversight on 
our part, we would be happy to rectify the error in subsequent printings.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without 
the prior written permission of the publisher. This book is sold subject to the 
condition that it shall not be resold, lent, hired out or otherwise circulated 
without the express prior consent of the publisher.
Contents
Introduction vii
T ranslators’ Note ix
Notes from Underground 1
Part One 3
Part Two 39
Note on the T ext 116
Notes 116
Extra Material 121
Fyodor Dostoevsky’s Life 123
Fyodor Dostoevsky’s W orks 135
Select Bibliography 146Other books by fyodor  dostoevsky
published by Alma Classics
The Adolescent (tr. by Dora O’Brien)
The Crocodile (tr. by Guy Daniels)
Devils (tr. by Roger Cockrell) 
The Double (tr. by Hugh Aplin)
The Eternal Husband (tr. by Hugh Aplin)
The Gambler (tr. by Hugh Aplin)
The House of  the Dead (tr. by Roger Cockrell)
Humiliated and Insulted (tr. by Ignat Avsey)
The Idiot (tr. Ignat Avsey)
Poor People (tr. by Hugh Aplin)
Uncle’s Dream (tr. by Roger Cockrell)
Winter Notes on Summer Impressions (tr. by Kyril FitzLyon)Notes from UndergroundNotes from UndergroundPart One 
Under the FloorboardsBoth the author of  these “Notes” and the notes them­
selves are, of  course, fictitious. All the same, people like 
the author of  these notes not only can, but indeed must, 
exist in our society, given the circumstances in which our 
society was formed. I wanted to present to the public, with 
rather more prominence than usual, a character of  recent 
times – a representative of  a generation which is still with 
us. In this first extract, entitled “Under the Floorboards”, 
this person describes himself  and his views and wants, as it 
were, to explain the reasons why such an individual made 
an appearance – and had to make an appearance – in our 
midst. The second extract will contain actual “notes” about 
certain events in his life.
– Fyodor Dostoevsky
1
I
’m  a  sick  man … a spiteful man… an unattractive man, that’s what 
I am. I suspect there’s something wrong with my liver. But I don’t 
understand a damn thing about my illness, nor do I know for sure what’s 
wrong with me. I’m not being treated for anything and never have been, 
though I respect doctors and medical science. Besides, I’m extremely 
superstitious, at least enough to have respect for medicine. (I’m suf-
ficiently educated not to be superstitious, but I am superstitious.) It’s 
because I’m spiteful that I don’t want to have any treatment. Now that’s 
something you’re probably not inclined to understand. Alright, but I 
do understand it. I couldn’t of course explain to you who it is that I will 
actually hurt by my spite; I know perfectly well that I would be quite 
unable to foul things up for the doctors by not being treated by them; I’m 
aware, no one more so, that all this will harm only myself and nobody 
else. All the same, if I’m not being treated, it’s entirely out of spite. 
There’s something wrong with my liver – well, let it get worse!
I’ve been living like this for a long time – about twenty years. I’m 
forty now . I used to work in the Civil Service, but I don’t any more. 
I was a spiteful civil servant. I was rude and took pleasure in being 
rude. I never accepted bribes, you know , so I had to find some other 
reward even if it was only that. (A bad joke. But I won’t cross it out. 
I wrote it because I thought it would be very witty . Now that I see I 
wanted to show off horribly , I deliberately won’t cross it out.) When, 
occasionally , people came up to my table to ask for information, I used 
to snarl at them and was delighted every time I succeeded in upsetting 
them. I almost invariably succeeded. For the most part they were timid 
people. Of course – they were petitioners. Among the swankier lot, 
there was one army officer I particularly detested. He simply refused to 
do what he was told and rattled his sword in a disgusting way . I waged 
war on him about that sword for a year and a half and got the better of 
him in the end. He stopped rattling.
Anyway , that happened when I was young. But do you know , 
gentlemen, the real point about my spite – that is, the essence of it, notes  from  underground
8
the most revolting aspect of it? It was that I was shamefully aware, 
even at my most bilious, that I was not only not a spiteful, or even an 
embittered man, but was merely frightening sparrows to no purpose 
and doing it just for fun. I might be foaming at the mouth – but you 
bring me some little toy , give me a cup of tea with a touch of sugar 
in it, and I’ll calm down, even be deeply touched – though later I’ll 
probably be snarling at myself and, out of shame, suffering insomnia 
for months. That’s the way I behave, after all.
I lied when I said just now that I was a spiteful civil servant. I lied 
out of spite. I was simply indulging myself with the petitioners and the 
army officer. I could never really become spiteful – I constantly sensed 
in myself a great many elements working in the opposite direction. I 
felt they were just swarming inside me, these opposing elements, and 
I knew that they had been swarming inside me all my life and were 
insisting on being let out. But I wouldn’t let them out – wouldn’t let 
them, would not let them out quite deliberately . They tormented me to 
the point of making me ashamed of myself, having convulsions, till I 
got tired of them in the end – goodness, how tired! Doesn’t it seem to 
you, gentlemen, that I’m apologizing to you for something, that I’m 
asking you to forgive me for something?… I’m sure that’s what it seems 
like to you… But as a matter of fact, I promise you, I couldn’t care less 
even if it does.
I have failed not only to become spiteful – but to become anything 
else for that matter: vicious or kind, scoundrel or honest man, hero or 
insect. And now I am living out my days in my corner, taunting myself 
with the vicious and useless consolation that an intelligent man of the 
nineteenth century can’t seriously make himself into anything and that 
only a fool can succeed in making himself into something. Y es, sir, an 
intelligent man of the nineteenth century must be – indeed is morally 
bound to be – essentially a creature without character. A man with 
character, a public figure, must essentially be a limited creature. This is 
my conviction of forty years. I am now forty years old. Forty years is a 
whole life. It is extreme old age. It is indecent to live beyond this, vulgar 
and immoral. Who lives beyond forty? Answer me sincerely , honestly . 
I’ll tell you who lives beyond forty . Fools and scoundrels do. I’ll say this 
to all those venerable elders, to their face! I’ll say it to all those silver-
haired sweet-smelling elders, yes – to the face of the whole world I’ll 
say it! I have a full right to say it because I myself will live to sixty . I’ll par t  one  · chapter  1
9
live to seventy! I’ll live to eighty years old… Hang on a minute. Let me 
catch my breath.
Gentlemen, you probably think I’m trying to make you laugh. Y ou’re 
wrong there too. I’m not at all the sort of jolly fellow you think I am – or 
as perhaps you think I am. Anyway , if all this chatter irritates you – and 
I feel that by now you are irritated – then just ask me who in fact I am. 
I will answer: I was a very minor clerk in the Civil Service, a collegiate 
assessor. I used to work in order to eat (and for that reason alone) and 
when, last year, a distant relative of mine left me six thousand roubles in 
his will, I retired immediately and settled into my corner. I used to live 
in that corner before, but now I’ve settled down in it. It’s a rotten room, 
mine – nasty , on the outskirts of town. My servant is an old peasant 
woman, spiteful because she’s stupid, and what’s more she always 
smells. They tell me that the Petersburg climate is doing me no good 
and that, for someone of negligible means, life in Petersburg is very 
expensive. I know all that, know it better than all those sagacious and 
experienced counsellors and wiseacres. But I’m staying in Petersburg; I 
won’t leave Petersburg! I won’t leave it because… Ah! It doesn’t matter 
at all whether I leave it – or don’t.
Anyway
, what can an honest man talk about with the greatest pos-
sible pleasure?
Answer: about himself.
So I too will talk about myself.
2
N
ow  i  want  to  tell  you , gentlemen, whether you want to hear it or 
not, why I couldn’t even manage to make myself into an insect. 
I tell you solemnly that I often wanted to become an insect but didn’t 
manage even that. I swear to you, gentlemen, that to be too much aware 
of things is an illness, a real, genuine illness. For ordinary purposes it 
would be quite enough for people to have half, or even a quarter, of the 
awareness that falls to the lot of an educated individual in our wretched 
nineteenth century – an individual, what’s more, with the additional 
misfortune of living in Petersburg, the most abstract and premeditated 
city on the globe. (There are premeditated and unpremeditated cit-
ies.) It would for instance be quite enough to be as aware as so-called  notes  from  underground
10
spontaneous and decisive people. I bet you think I’m writing all this in 
order to boast or to make fun of decisive people and that I’m boasting 
in bad taste too, rattling my sword like my officer. But, gentlemen, who 
wants to admit his own infirmities, let alone boast and glory in them?
But why just me… everyone does it; everyone shows off their 
infirmities and I possibly more than anyone else. Don’t let’s argue; my 
point is absurd. But, in spite of it, I’m firmly convinced that not just 
excessive awareness, but any awareness at all, is in itself an illness. I 
insist on that. Let’s put it aside for a minute. Tell me this: why did it 
sometimes happen that just at the moment – yes, at the very moment 
– at which I was most capable of appreciating all the fine points of 
everything “beautiful and sublime”,* as they used to say , I found that 
I was capable of not only appreciating but of actually performing acts 
so unseemly that… well, in a word, acts which I suppose everyone 
performs but which I happened to perform, as if deliberately , at the 
moment when I was most aware they ought not to be performed? 
And the more I was aware of the Good, of everything “beautiful and 
sublime”, the deeper I sank into my own mire and the more capable I 
was of being submerged in it altogether. But the main thing was not 
that I just happened to do it, but that it felt as if it was right and proper 
for it to be like that, as if it was my absolutely normal condition – not 
at all an illness or a damaging addiction. So, at last, even the desire 
to struggle against the addiction left me and it all ended up with my 
almost believing, or perhaps really believing, that it was my absolutely 
normal condition and not an illness or addiction at all. But at first, at 
the beginning, how much torment I suffered in that struggle! I did not 
believe that the same sort of thing happened to other people and all my 
life I kept it to myself, as a secret. I was ashamed of it – and perhaps I 
still feel ashamed. It reached such a point that I used to feel a sort of 
secret, abnormal, contemptible little delight* coming back to my corner 
on some foul Petersburg night, acutely aware that only that day I’d 
done something abominable, that what had been done could in no way 
be undone; and I would inwardly , secretly , gnaw , gnaw at myself with 
my teeth, rasp and suck away at myself, until the bitterness turned into 
some shameful, damnable sweetness and finally into definite, serious 
delight. Y es, into delight! Into delight! I insist on that. In fact, that’s 
why I started this conversation: because I want to know for certain 
whether other people experience this kind of delight.par t  one  · chapter  2
11
I’ll explain. The delight that I felt came precisely from being too 
acutely aware of my own degradation, from the feeling that you’ve 
come up against a brick wall, that it’s bad but at the same time cannot 
be otherwise, that there is no way out, that you’ll never become a 
different person, that even if you still had sufficient time or belief to 
change into something else, you probably wouldn’t want to change. 
And if you did want to, you probably wouldn’t do anything about it 
because, in fact, there’s simply nothing to change into. But the main and 
final point is this: it all happens in accordance with the normal, basic 
laws of heightened awareness, and the inertia that follows from these 
laws. Therefore, it’s not only that you can’t change yourself, but that 
there’s nothing in this case that you can do about it. So, for example, 
as a consequence of heightened awareness, one feels comfortable 
performing villainous actions, as though it’s a consolation to a villain 
to realize that he really is a villain. But enough… Oh! I’ve blathered on 
but what have I explained?… How to explain this delight? But I will 
explain! I’ll get there in the end! That’s why I took up my pen…
I am, for example, terribly touchy . I’m mistrustful and quick to 
take offence, like a hunchback or a dwarf. But there have been actual 
moments in my life when, if somebody had slapped my face, I would 
perhaps have been glad even of that. I’m being serious: I probably would 
have been able to find a kind of delight, even on such an occasion. 
Of course, a delight of despair. But in moments of despair there can 
be the most acute delight, particularly when you can see no way out 
of your situation. And when your face has been slapped – well, then 
you’ll be crushed by the consciousness of the pulp to which you’ve been 
reduced. But the main thing is, whichever way you look at it, the result 
is that I’m always the first to be blamed and, worst of all, I’m guilty 
though guiltless, so to speak, simply for acting in conformity with the 
laws of nature. I am held responsible first, because I’m more intelligent 
than anyone else around me. (I have always considered myself more 
intelligent than anyone around me and, would you believe it, sometimes 
I was even ashamed of it; at least, all my life I have averted my gaze and 
could never look people straight in the eye.) And that is why , in the last 
resort, I am responsible: because, even if I’d had any magnanimity of 
spirit, I would have been aware of its irrelevance and then become even 
more tormented. I would probably not have been able to do anything 
with my magnanimity – not even forgive, because the offender probably notes  from  underground
12
would have slapped me in conformity with the laws of nature. Y ou can’t 
forgive the laws of nature – but nor can you forget them because, laws 
of nature or not, the sense of grievance still remains. And finally , even 
if I had no desire whatsoever to be magnanimous but, on the contrary , 
wanted to take revenge on the offender, I would not have been able to 
take revenge on anyone because, even if I had been able, I would never 
have dared. Why wouldn’t I have dared? About this, I want to say a 
couple of words more.
3
Y
ou  see , people  who know how to take revenge, or anyway to stand 
up for themselves – how do they actually do it? As soon as a feeling 
of revenge takes hold of them, it does so to the exclusion of everything 
else. That individual will then go straight for his goal like a mad bull, 
with his head lowered and horns pointing straight in front of him, and 
only a wall would stop him. (By the way , when faced with a wall these 
sorts of people – that is to say , spontaneous and decisive people – genu-
inely give up. For them a wall is not an obstacle to be circumvented, as it 
is for example for us, people who think and therefore do nothing; it’s not 
an excuse for turning away from the road, an excuse in which we think-
ing people don’t really believe but which we’re only too pleased to have. 
No, they give up, quite genuinely . The wall has a calming effect on them, 
provides them with a moral escape, something final and perhaps even 
something mystical… but more about the wall later.) Well, I consider a 
spontaneous individual like this to be a real, normal person – as tender 
Mother Nature hoped for when she obligingly set him upon this earth 
– and of such a man I am green with envy . He’s stupid – I don’t deny that. 
But perhaps a normal person is bound to be stupid. How can one know? 
That may even be very beautiful. And I am all the more confirmed in 
my – so to speak – hunch that if, for instance, you take the antithesis 
of a normal man, that is to say a man of intense awareness, a man who 
has of course appeared not as a natural phenomenon but out of a test 
tube (this, gentlemen, is almost mysticism but I have a hunch about that 
too), that this test-tube man sometimes gives up so completely when 
faced with his antithesis that he genuinely considers himself, with all 
his intense awareness, to be a mouse and not a man. Alright, let it be par t  one  · chapter  3
13
an intensely aware mouse, but it’s still a mouse. But here we’re talking 
of a man and, consequently , etc… And, above all, his own opinion of 
himself is that he’s a mouse. Nobody asks him to think that – but this is 
an important point.
Now let’s have a look at this mouse in action. Let’s assume that it has 
taken offence – and it almost always feels offended – and also that it 
wants to take revenge. And perhaps it has concentrated in itself more 
resentment than there is in l’homme de la nature et de la vérité *, a 
nasty , base, petty desire to pay the offender back in kind, and perhaps 
the nastiness is still working away in it more than it does in l’homme de 
la nature et de la vérité, because l’homme de la nature et de la vérité, in 
his innate stupidity , considers his act of revenge to be merely a matter 
of justice, while the mouse, in consequence of its intensified awareness, 
rejects the justice of it. And now we’re at last at the very heart of the 
matter, at the very act of revenge. Wretched mouse! Apart from the 
one original nastiness it has heaped up around itself, in the form of 
questions and doubts, so many other vile things, it has added to that 
single question so many unresolved questions and doubts that, willy-
nilly , there has collected round it some sort of fatal swill, a kind of 
stinking slurry consisting of its doubts, of its worries and finally of 
the spittle which rains on it from the spontaneous decision-makers, in 
the shape of judges, dictators and so on, standing triumphantly round 
it, roaring with laughter at the top of their healthy lungs. Naturally 
enough, all that’s left for it to do is to dismiss it all with a wave of its 
little paw and, with a smile of assumed contempt in which it doesn’t 
itself believe, to slip shamefully through its little crack. There, in its 
nasty , stinking hole under the floorboards, our mouse – wounded, 
crushed and derided – immediately sinks into a cold, poisonous and 
above all everlasting resentment. For forty years on end it will continue 
to recall its humiliation down to the very last, most shameful detail, and 
at the same time will add details even more shameful, spitefully teasing 
itself, working itself up with its own fantasies. It will be ashamed of 
its own fantasies but, in spite of that, it will recall everything, it will 
pick every thing over; it will invent imaginary things about itself that 
might have happened and it will forgive nothing. Probably it will start 
to take revenge, but, somehow , in snatches, in trifles, from behind the 
stove, incognito, without believing either in its right to take revenge or 
in the success of its acts of vengeance and knowing in advance that, notes  from  underground
14
in all its attempts to take revenge, it will itself suffer a hundred times 
more than whoever it wants to take revenge on, who may hardly have 
noticed it. On its deathbed it will recall everything, with all the interest 
accumulated in the course of the years and… It’s precisely in this cold, 
loathsome half-despair, half-belief – in the conscious decision to bury 
oneself alive under the floorboards for forty years out of sheer grief, in 
the laboriously constructed (but somewhat unconvincing) hopelessness 
of one’s situation, in all that poison of unsatisfied desires that have 
penetrated deep inside, in all that fever of vacillation, of taking 
permanent decisions and immediately regretting them – that lies the 
very essence of that strange delight which I’m talking about. It is so 
refined, sometimes so elusive to the conscious mind, that people with 
just a slightly limited intelligence – or even simply people with strong 
nerves – will not understand a single thing about it. “Perhaps,” you will 
add with a grin, “people whose faces have never been slapped will not 
understand it either,” and so you will politely hint that I may have had 
my face slapped and therefore speak from experience. I bet that’s what 
you think. But don’t you worry gentlemen: my face has never been 
slapped – though I couldn’t care less what you think about it. Speaking 
for myself, I’m sorry perhaps that I haven’t slapped enough faces in my 
time. But enough… not another word on this subject, which you seem 
to find so extraordinarily interesting.
I shall continue, calmly , about people with strong nerves who don’t 
understand this refinement of delight. In certain cases these gentlemen 
– though they bellow like bulls at the tops of their voices, and this 
admittedly does them the greatest possible credit – these gentlemen 
as I’ve already said give up whenever they are faced with impossibility . 
Impossibility means a stone wall. What stone wall? Well obviously , 
the laws of nature, the conclusions of natural science, mathematics. 
Once it’s been proved to you that you’re descended from an ape, it’s 
no use pulling a face; just accept it. Once they’ve proved to you that a 
single droplet of your own fat must be dearer to you than a hundred 
thousand of your fellow human beings and consequently that all the 
so-called virtues and duties are nothing but ravings and prejudices, 
then accept that too, because there’s nothing to be done. T wice two is 
mathematics. Just try and argue with that.
“Heavens!” they will scream at you. “Y ou can’t rebel: it’s twice two 
is four! Nature doesn’t ask you for your opinion; it couldn’t care less par t  one  · chapter  3
15
about your desires, about whether you like its laws or whether you 
don’t; it is your duty to accept nature as it is and, therefore, everything 
that goes with it. It means that a wall is a wall…” and so on and so 
forth. Good Lord! What do I care for the laws of nature or arithmetic 
if, for whatever reason, I don’t like those laws or the rule that twice two 
is four? Obviously , I can’t knock down a wall like this with my head if 
I don’t actually have the strength to do so; but neither will I make my 
peace with it simply because it is a stone wall and I do not have enough 
strength.
As if such a stone wall really does bring calm with it, as if it really 
does contain a single word of peace, simply because it is twice two is 
four. Oh, absurdity of absurdities! It may be better to understand all, to 
be aware of all – all the impossibilities and stone walls; better not to be 
reconciled with a single one of these impossibilities and stone walls, if 
you loathe the idea of being reconciled; and better to employ the most 
inescapable, the most logical combinations to reach the most repulsive 
conclusions on the eternal theme that even the stone wall is in some 
sense your fault – although once again it’s absolutely clear that it isn’t 
at all your fault – and consequently to sink voluptuously into inertia, 
while silently and impotently grinding your teeth, brooding on the fact 
that you haven’t even got anyone to be angry with, that there is no 
object for your anger and perhaps never will be, that it is substitution, 
false shuffling, card-sharping, that it is simply a mess – you don’t know 
what and you don’t know who, but, in spite of all these unknowables 
and false shufflings, you ache all the same and the less you know , the 
more you ache!
4
H
a , ha , ha ! Well, after that you’ll find delight even in toothache!” 
you’ll exclaim, laughing.
“Well?” I’ll reply , “There is delight even in toothache.”
I had toothache for a whole month, so I know there is. In this case, 
of course, people don’t suffer in silence. They are angry and groan, 
but their groans are disingenuous; they are mixed with sarcasm – and 
sarcasm is the whole point. It is just those groans that express the 
sufferer’s delight; he wouldn’t have been groaning if he hadn’t felt 
“/e.sc/v.sc/e.sc/r.sc/g.sc/r.sc/e.sc/e.sc/n.sc/s.sc /s.sc/e.sc/r.sc/i.sc/e.sc/s.sc
Beautifully produced classics, affordably priced
Alma Classics is committed to making available a wide range of 
literature from around the globe. Most of the titles are enriched by an 
extensive critical apparatus, notes and extra reading material, as well as 
a selection of photographs. The texts are based on the most authoritative 
editions and edited using a fresh, accessible editorial approach. With 
an emphasis on production, editorial and typographical values, Alma 
Classics aspires to revitalize the whole experience of reading classics.
/bullet.012/bullet.012For our complete list and latest offers
visit
almabooks.com/evergreensalma  classics
alma  classics  aims to publish mainstream and lesser-known European 
classics in an innovative and striking way , while employing the highest 
editorial and production standards. By way of a unique approach 
the range offers much more, both visually and textually , than readers 
have come to expect from contemporary classics publishing.
latest  titles  published  by  alma  classics
398 W illiam Makepeace Thackeray , V anity Fair
399
 J
ules V erne, A Fantasy of  Dr Ox
400
 
Anonymous, Beowulf
401
 Oscar W
ilde, Selected Plays
402
 Ale
xander T rocchi, The Holy Man and Other Stories
403
 Char
les Dickens, David Copperfield
404
 Cyr
ano de Bergerac, A V oyage to the Moon
405
 J
ack London, White Fang
406
 Antonin Ar
taud, Heliogabalus, or The Anarchist Crowned
407
 J
ohn Milton, Paradise Lost
408
 J
ames Fenimore Cooper, The Last of  the Mohicans
409
 Char
les Dickens, Mugby Junction
410
 R
obert Louis Stevenson, Kidnapped
411
 P
aul Éluard, Selected Poems
412
 Alan Bur
ns, Dreamerika!
413
 T
homas Hardy , Jude the Obscure
414
 V
irginia Woolf, Flush
415
 Ab
bé Prevost, Manon Lescaut
416
 W
illiam Blake, Selected Poems
417
 Alan Rid
dell, Eclipse: Concrete Poems
418
 W
illiam Wordsworth, The Prelude and Other Poems
419
 T
obias Smollett, The Expedition of  Humphry Clinker
420
 P
ablo Picasso, The Three Little Girls and Desire Caught by the T ail
421
 Nik
olai Gogol, The Government Inspector
422
 R
udyard Kipling, Kim
423
 J
ean-Paul Sartre, Politics and Literature
424
 Matthe
w Lewis, The Monk
425
 Ambr
ose Bierce, The Devil’s Dictionary
426
 F
rances Hodgson Burnett, A Little Princess
427
 W
alt Whitman, Leaves of  Grass
428
 Daniel Def
oe, Moll Flanders
429
 Mar
y Wollstonecraft, The Vindications
430
 
Anonymous, The Song of  Roland
431
 Ed
ward Lear, The Owl and the Pussycat and Other Nonsense Poetry
432
 Anton Chekho
v , Three Y ears
433
 Fy
odor Dostoevsky , Uncle’s Dream
www .almaclassics.com